Title: ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.01509v1

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 02:21:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
## ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts 

Heng Zhao 1 Zilei Shao 2 Guy Van den Broeck 2 Zhe Zeng 1

Abstract 

Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models scale by ac-tivating only a small subset of experts per to-ken. However, training such models remains challenging because top-k routing is discrete and non-differentiable, requiring gradient estimators for expert selection whose design remains a cen-tral open problem. We introduce ProbMoE, a probabilistic routing framework that models ex-pert selection as a distribution over cardinality-constrained expert subsets and formulates routing as probabilistic inference in this discrete subset space. We first propose ProbMoE Exact-k rout-ing, which samples k-expert subsets in the for-ward pass, and the backward pass uses gradients through each expert’s exact marginal probabil-ity as a tractable surrogate for the true gradient. ProbMoE naturally generalizes to a dynamic-k

routing setting, where both training and inference constrain the routing cardinality to the same pre-defined range, allowing adaptive expert alloca-tion per token. Across benchmarks and model backbones, ProbMoE Exact-k achieves strong performance compared to competitive baselines, with improved expert utilization and routing di-versity; ProbMoE Dynamic-k achieves compa-rable performance with fewer activated experts. Code is available at: https://github.com/ HengHugoZhao/ProbMoE.git 

1. Introduction 

Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures have emerged as a central strategy for scaling large language models while keeping computational costs manageable (Shazeer et al., 2017; Fedus et al., 2022). By selecting only a small subset 

> 1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Char-lottesville, USA 2Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: Heng Zhao <qgg5se@virginia.edu >.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). 

of experts for each token, MoE models achieve sublinear growth in FLOPs and allow the total parameter count to substantially exceed the active compute budget (Du et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024). However, training MoE models remains challenging be-cause routing relies on a hard top-k operator that is discrete and non-differentiable, making it incompatible with stan-dard gradient-based updates. In standard MoE architectures, the router computes expert scores by applying a softmax operation on expert logits and then selects the top-k experts per token. To bypass differentiating the top-k operator, com-mon training procedures ignore its dependence on the router logits and propagate gradients only through the softmax probabilities (Shazeer et al., 2017; Lepikhin et al., 2021; Rajbhandari et al., 2022). As a result, the router receives limited learning signal about alternative expert subsets be-yond the deterministically selected top-k experts, which can lead to highly concentrated routing distributions, poor expert utilization, and unstable training dynamics (Lewis et al., 2021; Zuo et al., 2022; Clark et al., 2022). These challenges call for a principled routing mechanism. Instead of treating routing as a deterministic operator with heuristic gradient approximations, we propose to cast expert routing as a probabilistic inference problem: for each token, the selection scores of each expert induce a distribution over expert subsets, and selecting k experts corresponds to probabilistic inference under a cardinality constraint. From this perspective, training aims to optimize the expected loss under the expert subset distribution, which requires differentiating with respect to the parameters of a discrete, cardinality-constrained subset distribution. Although the space of expert subsets is combinatorial, our proposed probabilistic formulation of MoE routing ad-mits tractable inference. To optimize this formulation, we adopt SIMPLE (Ahmed et al., 2023), a gradient estima-tor for cardinality-constrained subset distributions. Our proposed framework ProbMoE uses SIMPLE to sample valid k-subsets of experts in the forward pass and differen-tiate through the induced expert-selection marginals in the backward pass, yielding routing gradients that capture how changes in the selection probability of each expert affect the expected loss. It enables stochastic exploration of expert subsets with informative router updates, while preserving 1

> arXiv:2606.01509v1 [cs.LG] 1 Jun 2026

ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts <latexit sha1_base64="VhTpruEuvtrLc0oAnu7hy56CtJw=">AAAB/XicbVDLSgMxFL1TX7W+xsfOTbAIrsqMSBVBKHXjsqJ9QDuUTJppQzMPkoxQp8VfceNCEbf+hzv/xkw7C209EDiccy/35LgRZ1JZ1reRW1peWV3Lrxc2Nre2d8zdvYYMY0FonYQ8FC0XS8pZQOuKKU5bkaDYdzltusPr1G8+UCFZGNyrUUQdH/cD5jGClZa65kHHx2pAME+qk0s0vhujKzTsmkWrZE2BFomdkSJkqHXNr04vJLFPA0U4lrJtW5FyEiwUI5xOCp1Y0giTIe7TtqYB9ql0kmn6CTrWSg95odAvUGiq/t5IsC/lyHf1ZJpVznup+J/XjpV34SQsiGJFAzI75MUcqRClVaAeE5QoPtIEE8F0VkQGWGCidGEFXYI9/+VF0jgt2eVS+fasWKlmdeThEI7gBGw4hwrcQA3qQOARnuEV3own48V4Nz5mozkj29mHPzA+fwBK1JR7</latexit> 

B : |S| = k <latexit sha1_base64="fhV9/FdgavtiC+chqcwtTFWKUMM=">AAAB6XicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoPgKeyKRI9BLx6jmAckS5idzCZD5rHMzAphyR948aCIV//Im3/jJNmDJhY0FFXddHdFCWfG+v63V1hb39jcKm6Xdnb39g/Kh0cto1JNaJMornQnwoZyJmnTMstpJ9EUi4jTdjS+nfntJ6oNU/LRThIaCjyULGYEWyc9KN0vV/yqPwdaJUFOKpCj0S9/9QaKpIJKSzg2phv4iQ0zrC0jnE5LvdTQBJMxHtKuoxILasJsfukUnTllgGKlXUmL5urviQwLYyYicp0C25FZ9mbif143tfF1mDGZpJZKslgUpxxZhWZvowHTlFg+cQQTzdytiIywxsS6cEouhGD55VXSuqgGtWrt/rJSv8njKMIJnMI5BHAFdbiDBjSBQAzP8Apv3th78d69j0VrwctnjuEPvM8frlGNeg==</latexit> 

or <latexit sha1_base64="/5fQXAMtoI8Cnpzk0Yqv/jLNJyQ=">AAACEnicbVC7TsMwFHXKq5RXgJHFokKCpUoQKowVLIxF0IfURJHjOq1Vxwm2g6hCvoGFX2FhACFWJjb+BqfNAC1HsnR8zr269x4/ZlQqy/o2SguLS8sr5dXK2vrG5pa5vdOWUSIwaeGIRaLrI0kY5aSlqGKkGwuCQp+Rjj+6yP3OHRGSRvxGjWPihmjAaUAxUlryzKORl4aUZ9Bh5BY+QCdEaogRS6+z/JeLeQW6zzyzatWsCeA8sQtSBQWanvnl9COchIQrzJCUPduKlZsioShmJKs4iSQxwiM0ID1NOQqJdNPJSRk80EofBpHQjys4UX93pCiUchz6ujLfWM56ufif10tUcOamlMeJIhxPBwUJgyqCeT6wTwXBio01QVhQvSvEQyQQVjrFig7Bnj15nrSPa3a9Vr86qTbOizjKYA/sg0Ngg1PQAJegCVoAg0fwDF7Bm/FkvBjvxse0tGQUPbvgD4zPHzG5ndM=</latexit> 

kmin → |S| → kmax  

> <latexit sha1_base64="gjUaqdRdMHp+xIIMx2OEuKa4I6M=">AAACEnicbVDLSgMxFM3UV62vqks3wSJ0UMqMSHVZ7MZlBfuAzlAymUwbmkmGJCOWod/gxl9x40IRt67c+Temj4W2Hkg4Oedebu4JEkaVdpxvK7eyura+kd8sbG3v7O4V9w9aSqQSkyYWTMhOgBRhlJOmppqRTiIJigNG2sGwPvHb90QqKvidHiXEj1Gf04hipI3UK9pR+cGGngiFhh5HAUM9We6X67aXUHgKze2dwdi87V6x5FScKeAyceekBOZo9IpfXihwGhOuMUNKdV0n0X6GpKaYkXHBSxVJEB6iPukaylFMlJ9NVxrDE6OEMBLSHK7hVP3dkaFYqVEcmMoY6YFa9Cbif1431dGVn1GepJpwPBsUpQxqASf5wJBKgjUbGYKwpOavEA+QRFibFAsmBHdx5WXSOq+41Ur19qJUu57HkQdH4BiUgQsuQQ3cgAZoAgwewTN4BW/Wk/VivVsfs9KcNe85BH9gff4AZkOaxg==</latexit>

f (x) → ↑ r (g(C)ω + ω m(C)) 

p

z₁ z₂ z₃

Input x 

MoE block input 

Router logits 

r = Router θ (x) 

Straight-through marginal gradient estimator 

Forward pass Gradient ∇ θ Expert Stochastic Step 

Fixed or dynamic cardinality 

f₁(x)  

> <latexit sha1_base64="UGn/EkZ2QTB/P6+pn5IiSc2f34c=">AAACAHicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vqAsXbgaLUDclEakui25cVrAPaEKYTCbt0JlMmJmIJXTjr7hxoYhbP8Odf+O0zUJbD1w4nHMv994Tpowq7TjfVmlldW19o7xZ2dre2d2z9w86SmQSkzYWTMheiBRhNCFtTTUjvVQSxENGuuHoZup3H4hUVCT3epwSn6NBQmOKkTZSYB95KuPQS2lAoYcjoWEc0NrjWWBXnbozA1wmbkGqoEArsL+8SOCMk0RjhpTqu06q/RxJTTEjk4qXKZIiPEID0jc0QZwoP589MIGnRolgLKSpRMOZ+nsiR1ypMQ9NJ0d6qBa9qfif1890fOXnNEkzTRI8XxRnDGoBp2nAiEqCNRsbgrCk5laIh0girE1mFROCu/jyMumc191GvXF3UW1eF3GUwTE4ATXggkvQBLegBdoAgwl4Bq/gzXqyXqx362PeWrKKmUPwB9bnD2ftlac=</latexit>

∑ ωi · fi(x)

Weighted sum, k active experts 

π = softmax(r) 

Routing probabilities 

f₁(x) 

f₂(x) 

f₃(x)  

> <latexit sha1_base64="UGn/EkZ2QTB/P6+pn5IiSc2f34c=">AAACAHicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vqAsXbgaLUDclEakui25cVrAPaEKYTCbt0JlMmJmIJXTjr7hxoYhbP8Odf+O0zUJbD1w4nHMv994Tpowq7TjfVmlldW19o7xZ2dre2d2z9w86SmQSkzYWTMheiBRhNCFtTTUjvVQSxENGuuHoZup3H4hUVCT3epwSn6NBQmOKkTZSYB95KuPQS2lAoYcjoWEc0NrjWWBXnbozA1wmbkGqoEArsL+8SOCMk0RjhpTqu06q/RxJTTEjk4qXKZIiPEID0jc0QZwoP589MIGnRolgLKSpRMOZ+nsiR1ypMQ9NJ0d6qBa9qfif1890fOXnNEkzTRI8XxRnDGoBp2nAiEqCNRsbgrCk5laIh0girE1mFROCu/jyMumc191GvXF3UW1eF3GUwTE4ATXggkvQBLegBdoAgwl4Bq/gzXqyXqx362PeWrKKmUPwB9bnD2ftlac=</latexit>

∑ ωi · fi(x)

f₃(x) 

π = softmax(r) 

Routing probabilities over experts 

TopK( π)

Pick top-k experts 

CONVENTIONAL ProbMoE Deterministic 

Top-k experts selected by softmax probability. 

Probabilistic 

Sample a subset of experts under a cardinality budget. 

f₂(x) 

Sample subset under budget B  

> <latexit sha1_base64="GMTATfaqsP8qmjmfMkNoDBtnwUY=">AAACGnicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vqEs3g0Wom5KIVJelblxWamuhCWEymbRDJw9mJkIJ+Q43/oobF4q4Ezf+jZM0iLYeGDhzzr3ce48bMyqkYXxplZXVtfWN6mZta3tnd0/fPxiIKOGY9HHEIj50kSCMhqQvqWRkGHOCApeRO3d6lft394QLGoW3chYTO0DjkPoUI6kkRzd70BI0gFaA5MR1027m8EbxwYilvUwZ1IM/Qic7dfS60TQKwGVilqQOSnQd/cPyIpwEJJSYISFGphFLO0VcUsxIVrMSQWKEp2hMRoqGKCDCTovTMniiFA/6EVcvlLBQf3ekKBBiFriqMt9RLHq5+J83SqR/aac0jBNJQjwf5CcMygjmOUGPcoIlmymCMKdqV4gniCMsVZo1FYK5ePIyGZw1zVazdXNeb3fKOKrgCByDBjDBBWiDa9AFfYDBA3gCL+BVe9SetTftfV5a0cqeQ/AH2uc37Eyg0w==</latexit>

S → Pr (S | B )

Figure 1. Comparison of conventional Top-k training and ProbMoE training. Left: Conventional MoE applies a deterministic top-k operator to the softmax routing probabilities for expert selection, while propagating gradients only through these probabilities. 

Right: ProbMoE models expert routing as probabilistic inference over discrete expert subsets. ProbMoE samples an expert subset S

from a cardinality-constrained distribution. Let z denote the binary mask of the sampled subset and let m denote the corresponding expert-selection marginals. Gradients are propagated through the straight-through mask g = stopgrad( z − m) + m, which is combined with the softmax routing probabilities to form the final routing weights. This yields informative router gradients while preserving sparse expert execution. ProbMoE Dynamic-k allows the subset size to vary within a range, with ProbMoE Exact-k recovered as a special case. 

sparse expert execution. Moreover, ProbMoE is agnostic to the underlying MoE architecture and can be flexibly inte-grated into the training of existing MoE models. Alongside improving fixed-k routing, another ongoing direc-tion in MoE research is dynamic expert allocation, where the number of activated experts can vary across tokens. It is a compelling setting because it allows the model to adapt com-putation to token- or task-level complexity. Such flexibility can improve efficiency and better match the computational needs of language modeling than a fixed-k setting. However, dynamic-k routing poses a distinct challenge: modeling the choice of expert subset size k. Methods designed for exact-

k routing assume a fixed subset size and therefore cannot be directly applied to variable cardinality selection, where the router must reason over subsets of different sizes. To this end, our proposed probabilistic framework naturally unifies exact-k and dynamic-k routing in a principled way, as shown in Figure 1. ProbMoE Exact-k conditions the subset distribution on a fixed cardinality, whereas ProbMoE Dynamic-k conditions the same distribution on a range of feasible cardinalities. Unlike prior adaptive expert allocation methods that rely on thresholding, null experts, or other heuristic gating rules (Yue et al., 2025; Jin et al., 2025a;b), ProbMoE Dynamic-k considers a normalized distribution over feasible expert subsets and enables effective training with tractable marginal-based router gradients. 

Contributions We summarize our main contributions as follows: (1) we propose to cast MoE routing as probabilistic inference problems over cardinality-constrained expert sub-sets; (2) we adopt the gradient estimator SIMPLE in MoE routing to pair probabilistic subset sampling with marginal-based router gradients; (3) we introduce a range-constrained routing variant for dynamic-k MoE routing that jointly in-fers expert identities and routing cardinality for each token; (4) in empirical evaluations, we show that ProbMoE Exact-

k improves expert utilization and routing diversity; (5) in dynamic k setting, experiment results show that ProbMoE Dynamic-k achieves competitive performance with fewer activated experts on average. 

2. Related Work 

Routing Optimization and Differentiability. Standard Top-k routing is non-differentiable, motivating several strategies to stabilize training. One stream of work modifies gradient propagation without changing the discrete nature of the forward pass, employing techniques such as dense backpropagation (Panda et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2026) or learned sparse gradient selection (Liu et al., 2023). Another line of work relaxes the discrete constraint, using continuous activations to approximate routing decisions (Wang et al., 2025). Although effective for improving optimization sta-bility, these methods do not explicitly model the distribution over feasible expert subsets, and therefore provide limited mechanisms for exploring alternative expert combinations during training. Prior routers have also introduced stochas-tic elements, such as noise injection (Shazeer et al., 2017; 2ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts 

Shabgahi et al., 2026) or randomized tie-breaking (Lepikhin et al., 2021; Fedus et al., 2022). However, they primarily treat routing as a deterministic operator augmented with heuristic randomization. To our knowledge, no prior work formulates MoE routing as probabilistic inference over dis-crete expert subsets, using stochastic subset selection as a principled mechanism for exploration during training. 

Adaptive Expert Allocation A parallel line of work moves beyond fixed-capacity routing to explore adaptive alloca-tion, where the number of active experts varies by token difficulty. Approaches such as DA-MoE (Aghdam et al., 2024), DynMoE (Guo et al., 2025), and AdaMOE (Zeng et al., 2024) trade off model capacity and cost by adjusting expert counts via learned thresholds or null routers. While these and related methods achieve dynamic sparsity (Yue et al., 2025; Jin et al., 2025a;b), they rely on heuristic gating mechanisms rather than a unified probabilistic formulation. Consequently, they lack the ability to perform differentiable selection while maintaining normalization over the combi-natorial space of expert subsets. 

Probabilistic Sampling Treating the MoE router as a prob-abilistic layer requires differentiable sampling from discrete distributions, a problem studied extensively outside the MoE context. Common relaxations such as the Concrete and Gumbel-Softmax distributions (Maddison et al., 2017; Jang et al., 2017) enable gradient-based optimization but often suffer from high variance or bias. In contrast, Ahmed et al. (2023) formulates subset selection as probabilistic inference under explicit cardinality constraints and the proposed gradi-ent estimator SIMPLE has shown to be effective in various learning settings (Qian et al., 2024; Shukla et al., 2023). We leverage this perspective to view the MoE router not as a deterministic switch but a probabilistic layer with tractable normalization and marginal probabilities. 

3. Preliminaries 

In this section, we review the standard formulation of MoE routing and formalize why top-k expert selection poses fun-damental challenges for gradient-based optimization, point-ing toward probabilistic formulations of expert selection. We consider a MoE layer with N experts indexed by [N ] ≜

{1, . . . , N }. Given the hidden state of an input token x ∈

Rd, the router produces a vector of logits r = Router θ (x) ∈

RN , where θ denotes the router parameters. Each expert is a function fi : Rd → Rd indexed by i ∈ [N ].The router logits r are converted into soft routing weights using the softmax function: 

πi = exp( ri)

PNj=1 exp( rj ) , ∀ i ∈ [N ].

A sparse MoE layer then selects a subset of experts using the top-k operator. Let Stop -k(r) = TopK( r) denote the set of indices corresponding to the k largest router logits. For any fixed subset S ⊆ [N ] with |S| = k, define the MoE output associated with selecting S as 

yS (x; r) ≜ X

> j∈S

πj fj (x). (1) The standard top-k routed output can therefore be written as 

y(x; r) = X 

> S⊆[N]
> |S|=k

I[S = Stop-k(r)] yS (x; r).

Differentiating this expression with respect to a router logit 

ri reveals two distinct paths: 

∂y (x; r)

∂r i

= X 

> S⊆[N]
> |S|=k

I[S = Stop -k(r)] ∂y S (x; r)

∂r i

| {z }

> softmax-weight path

+ X 

> S⊆[N]
> |S|=k

yS (x; r) ∂I[S = Stop -k(r)] 

∂r i

| {z }

> discrete-selection path

.

(2) The first term in equation (2) is differentiable because the selected subset is treated as fixed and gradients flow only through the softmax routing weights inside yS (x; r). In contrast, the second term contains the derivative of the subset-selection indicator I[S = Stop-k(r)] . This indica-tor is a discrete, piecewise-constant function of the router logits: it remains unchanged within each selection region and changes discontinuously at ranking boundaries. There-fore, this discrete selection path is non-differentiable under standard backpropagation. Conventional MoE training effectively drops the second term in Equation (2) by treating Stop -k(r) as fixed during the backward pass. Under this approximation, gradients with respect to r are computed only through the softmax routing weights assigned to the selected experts, giving 

∂L

∂r i

= X

> j∈Stop -k

 ∂L

∂y , f j (x)

 ∂π j

∂r i

.

The difficulty of training under top-k routing stems from the discrete nature of expert subset selection. Conventional training provides router gradients by modifying how gradi-ents are propagated through the selected experts. However, the resulting learning signal remains tied to a deterministic top-k decision, providing limited supervision for the discrete selection mechanism itself. As a result, alternative expert subsets receive limited exploration during training, which can reinforce concentrated routing patterns and worsen ex-pert under-utilization. Prior approaches partially mitigate 3ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts 

this issue by using dense straight-through estimator to pro-vide proxies for gradients for the discrete selection (Lewis et al., 2021; Panda et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2026), but these gradients are still defined over individual expert scores rather than over the structured subset selection process. This moti-vates a formulation that treats routing in a principled way as probabilistic inference over expert subsets. 

4. ProbMoE for Exact-k routing 

We begin by modeling MoE routing as a probabilistic la-tent layer . In a standard MoE layer, each token is routed to an expert subset, but top-k routing selects this subset deterministically and is non-differentiable with respect to the router logits. Rather than treating expert selection as a fixed discrete decision in the backward pass, ProbMoE considers the distribution over feasible expert subsets and trains the router by optimizing the expected loss under this distribution, defined as below 

J (θ) = ES∼Pr (·|| S|=k)

L yS (x; r) , (3) where Pr (· | | S| = k) is the router-induced distribution over feasible subsets S ⊆ [N ] with |S| = k, and L yS (x; r) is the point-wise task loss induced by the MoE output when subset S is selected. This objective optimizes the router over a distribution of feasible expert subsets, allowing alternative expert combinations to influence training. 

Exact-k subset distribution We formally define the router-induced distribution Pr (· | | S| = k) used in Equation (3) .For each expert i, let pi = σ(ri) denote its Bernoulli selec-tion probability, where σ(·) is the sigmoid function. These Bernoulli variables induce an unconstrained product distri-bution over expert subsets. To model exact-k routing, we condition this distribution on the constraint that exactly k

experts are selected. For any subset S ⊆ [N ] with |S| = k,the probability of this subset is 

Pr (S | | S| = k) = 1

Zk

Y

> j∈S

pj

Y

> j / ∈S

(1 − pj ),

where the normalizing constant is 

Zk = X 

> S⊆[N],|S|=k

Y

> j∈S

pj

Y

> j / ∈S

(1 − pj ). (4) 

Theorem 4.1 (Ahmed et al. (2023)) . The normalizing con-stant Zk in Equation (4) can be computed exactly in time 

O(N k ). Moreover, it can be computed in a vectorized com-plexity O(log N log k) assuming perfect parallelization. 

Thus, ProbMoE can define and normalize a distribution over exact-k expert subsets while remaining tractable. 

4.1. Forward pass 

ProbMoE samples an expert subset from the aforementioned exact-k distribution in the forward pass: 

S ∼ Pr (S | | S| = k).

The MoE layer then computes the subset-specific output in Equation (1) using the sampled subset S. Since |S| = k,each forward pass still evaluates only k experts per token, preserving the sparse execution pattern of standard MoE routing. Unlike deterministic top-k routing, which always selects the experts with the largest router scores, this stochas-tic forward pass can explore alternative expert combinations. As a result, high probability alternatives to the top-k set can be explored during training, preventing the same expert combination from being reinforced repeatedly while other nearly competitive subsets remain under-trained. At inference time, ProbMoE selects the Maximum-A-Posteriori (MAP) set, making the inference cost of ProbMoE Exact-k same as the conventional MoE routing. 

4.2. Backward pass 

Having defined the expected loss objective in Equation (3), we now describe how ProbMoE optimizes it in practice. Ideally, updating the router would require differentiating the expectation with respect to the router parameters: 

∇θ J (θ) = ∇θ ES∼Pr (·|| S|=k)

L yS (x; r) . (5) However, the sampled mask is discrete, so gradients cannot be propagated directly through the expert selection deci-sion under standard backpropagation. Therefore, the back-ward pass requires a differentiable proxy that captures how changes in the router logits affect the sampled subset. ProbMoE addresses this challenge by using conditional marginals, as a surrogate for the discrete sample in the backward pass as in SIMPLE (Ahmed et al., 2023). For each expert, the marginal measures its probability of being selected under the full exact-k subset distribution. Thus, the marginals provide a continuous, differentiable summary of the discrete selection process. Treating the non-selection factors (1 − pj ) as constants when differentiating with re-spect to log pj , the marginal probability of expert j is 

mj ≜ Pr (j ∈ S | | S| = k) = ∂ log Zk

∂ log pj

. (6) Since Zk is computed exactly by dynamic programming, these marginals are exact under the conditional exact-k dis-tribution and provide a tractable proxy for expert selection. 

Marginal-integrated routing weights The marginals alone describe selection probabilities, but the MoE layer ulti-mately requires routing weights that determine how expert 4ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts 

outputs are combined. The MoE output in Equation (1) is a weighted combination of expert outputs, so the routing mechanism must determine both which experts are selected and how their contributions are weighted. Incorporating the differentiable marginals into the routing weights allows learning to influence both discrete selection decisions and the relative contribution of selected experts, while remain-ing consistent with the underlying stochastic subset formu-lation. Let the sampled subset be represented by a k-hot mask z ∈ { 0, 1}N , where zi = 1 if expert i is selected and 

zi = 0 otherwise. ProbMoE combines the sampled forward mask, the marginals, and the soft routing weights through a straight-through estimator (Bengio et al., 2013): 

w =   stopgrad( z − m) + m ⊙ π, (7) where stopgrad( ·) blocks gradients through its argument. In the forward pass, stopgrad( z − m) + m = z, so the sampled mask is preserved. In the backward pass, gradients flow through both m and π, enabling joint optimization of expert selection and expert weighting. 

Resulting router gradients With the routing weights in Equation (7) , the ProbMoE gradient with respect to the router logit ri decomposes as 

∂L

∂r i

=

> N

X

> j=1

D ∂L

∂y , f j (x)

E 

mj

∂π j

∂r i

+ πj

∂m j

∂r i

.



(8) The first term in Equation (8) updates the softmax weight-ing of expert outputs, while the second term propagates gradients through the exact marginal probabilities. Thus, ProbMoE approximates the gradient of the expected loss objective in Equation (5) by differentiating the sampled loss through the marginal integrated routing weights in Equa-tion (7) : ∇θ J (θ) ≈ ∇ θ L y(x; r). In a synthetic experi-ment detailed in Appendix F, we show that this estimator yields lower gradient variance than that in DenseMixer. 

5. ProbMoE for Dynamic-k routing 

ProbMoE Exact-k formulation in the previous section pro-vides a differentiable way to train MoE routers when every token is assigned the same number of experts. However, different tokens may require different amounts of expert ca-pacity depending on their ambiguity, rarity, or task-specific complexity. This motivates dynamic MoE routing, where the number of active experts is allowed to vary across tokens. Because of the probabilistic routing formulation of Prob-MoE, it naturally extends beyond fixed-cardinality expert selection. Once expert routing is modeled as probabilistic inference over subsets, conditioning on a single cardinality becomes a modeling choice rather than a necessity. This observation motivates ProbMoE Dynamic-k routing, where the subset cardinality itself is treated as a discrete latent variable to be inferred jointly with expert identities. Formally, ProbMoE Dynamic-k defines a range constraint on the selected subset size, k ∈ [kmin , k max ]. Rather than conditioning the router induced distribution on a fixed cardi-nality constraint, ProbMoE Dynamic-k conditions it on the broader cardinality range. The induced distribution can be factorized by first sampling a cardinality k from the marginal distribution over feasible subset sizes and then sampling an expert subset conditioned on |S| = k. This factorization provides an efficient sampling procedure, while the resulting routing decision remains a sampled subset of experts. There-fore, ProbMoE Dynamic-k can adapt the routing budget per token while retaining the same probabilistic framework. 

Range-constrained expert selection ProbMoE Dynamic-

k routing extends the probabilistic subset formulation by relaxing the fixed-cardinality constraint. As in ProbMoE Exact-k routing, each expert i is associated with an indepen-dent Bernoulli selection probability pi = σ(ri), defining an unconstrained product measure over expert subsets S ⊆ [N ].ProbMoE Dynamic-k conditions on the constraint that the subset size lies in a predefined range, kmin ≤ | S| ≤ kmax .This yields the following distribution:          

> Pr(S|kmin ≤ | S| ≤ kmax ) = 1
> Z∗
> Y
> j∈S
> pj
> Y
> j / ∈S
> (1 −pj),

where Z∗ denotes the normalization constant. 

Theorem 5.1. Let Zk be the normalizing constant as in Equation (4) . Then the range-constrained normalizing constant, Z∗ = Pkmax  

> k=kmin

Zk, can be computed in time 

O(N k max ). Moreover, it admits a vectorized complexity 

O(log N log kmax ) assuming perfect parallelization. 

Proof is provided in Appendix B.1. Thus, the probability mass is renormalized over all subsets whose cardinality lies in [kmin , k max ] using the tractable normalization constant. 

Adaptive cardinality inference. Conditioning on the range 

B also induces a conditional distribution over subset sizes, 

Pr (|S| = k | kmin ≤ | S| ≤ kmax )= Pr (|S| = k)

Pkmax  

> k′=kmin

Pr (|S| = k′) , k ∈ [kmin , k max ]. (9) allowing the model to infer how many experts to allocate to each token. During training, we first sample a cardinality 

k from this distribution in Equation (9) and then sample an expert subset conditioned on |S| = k using ProbMoE Exact-

k procedure. This can be interpreted as jointly inferring a token-specific routing cardinality and the corresponding ex-pert subset within a single probabilistic model. We discuss practical choices of the kmin : kmax range in Appendix C. ProbMoE Dynamic-k retains differentiable expert-selection marginals for the backward pass. In particular, under the range constraint, each expert’s marginal probability can be 5ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts                                                                                                      

> Table 1. Performance comparison across benchmarks. Top-3 are highlighted; darker colors indicate better performance. GSM is evaluated by Exact Match; Law, Translation, and Summary by LLM-as-judge; MBPP and MMLU by LM Evaluation Harness. Model GSM Law Translation MBPP Summary MMLU Overall MMLU Stem
> OLMoE Backbone (Top-k= 8 )
> Base Model 15.85 5.70 11.09 19.80 7.40 53.40 44.91 Frozen Router 44.88 22.50 28.29 17.80 36.05 53.97 46.18 Conventional 45.94 25.00 27.56 23.20 33.70 54.04 46.46
> DenseMixer 47.00 27.90 30.32 24.40 37.50 53.95 46.18
> ProbMoE 50.19 29.00 31.63 22.80 39.29 53.69 45.54
> Qwen backbone (Top-k= 4 )
> Base Model 38.69 18.20 16.53 38.84 28.29 60.85 52.27 Frozen Router 53.37 33.01 32.75 35.20 38.29 61.08 53.19 Conventional 53.30 29.50 30.00 32.80 39.00 61.03 53.16 DefaultMoE 51.00 31.20 24.00 33.20 38.40 ––SparseMixer 1.30 3.40 3.50 0.00 2.10 ––ReMoE 46.30 25.50 16.99 33.00 25.80 ––DenseMixer 54.97 30.75 33.75 34.00 41.00 61.03 52.87
> ProbMoE 53.29 34.40 39.23 35.00 44.40 61.05 53.82
> Note: Baseline results are taken from the GitHub of Yao et al. (2026). The MMLU results for pretraining-based baselines are not included because reproducing these methods under the same setting would require substantially more compute than is available.

obtained by differentiating the range-constrained normaliz-ing constant with respect to the Bernoulli parameters. These marginals provide continuous surrogates for discrete expert selection during backpropagation, allowing router gradients to reflect the full range-constrained subset distribution. 

Proposition 5.2. Let Z∗ denote the normalizing constant over all subsets satisfying kmin ≤ | S| ≤ kmax . For each ex-pert j, the marginal probability under the range-constrained distribution satisfies that 

m∗ 

> j

≜ Pr (zj = 1 | kmin ≤ | S| ≤ kmax ) = ∂ log Z∗

∂ log pj

.

We provide the detailed proof in Appendix B.2. These range-constrained marginals provide differentiable expert-selection probabilities under the dynamic-k subset distri-bution. During training, we use them in the same straight-through routing-weight construction as in ProbMoE Exact-k

routing in Equation (7) , replacing mj with m∗ 

> j

. At inference time, ProbMoE Dynamic-k selects the MAP subset under the range constraint, allowing the model to choose both the expert identities and the number of active experts within 

[kmin , k max ]. We summarize this process in Algorithm 1. 

6. Experimental Setup 

Models We evaluate our method on two representative MoE architectures: OLMoE-1B-7B (Muennighoff et al., 2025), which activates 1B parameters out of 7B total, and Qwen 1.5-MoE-A 2.7B (Team, 2024), which contains 

14 .3B parameters in total with 2.7B activated at inference time. OLMoE follows a standard sparse MoE design with in-dependent experts, consisting of 16 transformer layers, each with 64 experts, from which exactly 8 experts are activated per token. In contrast, Qwen employs a shared-expert archi-tecture with 24 layers, where each layer contains 60 routed experts alongside 4 shared experts. All routing methods are applied consistently within each backbone, preserving the expert parameterization and architectural design. For Qwen, ProbMoE is applied only to the routed expert subset, leaving the shared experts unchanged, ensuring a fair comparison. 

Baselines We compare against several strong routing strate-gies. Frozen Router serves as a control baseline in which the router parameters are kept fixed during training. Conven-tional refers to the standard top-k MoE routing with discrete expert selections and sparse backpropagation. DenseMixer 

uses straight-through gradient estimators and performs dense gradient propagation during training while retain-ing sparse top-k routing at inference time. For the Qwen backbone, we include additional baselines commonly used in prior work. DefaultMoE provides dense gradient signals to the router by approximating unselected experts, enabling dense backpropagation for the gating mechanism while maintaining sparse expert activation (Panda et al., 2025). 

SparseMixer introduces a learned sparse backpropagation mechanism that dynamically determines which experts re-ceive gradients, balancing efficiency and stability (Liu et al., 2023). Finally, ReMoE replaces discrete routing with con-tinuous ReLU-based expert selection, enabling fully differ-entiable training without straight-through estimators (Wang et al., 2025). Training details and hyperparameters for re-producibility are provided in Appendix A.2. For a fair and controlled comparison, we follow the exper-6ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts   

> Figure 2. Ablation study of forward routing and backward gra-dient estimation under exact-krouting on OLMoE for GSM.
> Box plots show exact-match (EM) accuracy, where higher is better.

imental setup of DenseMixer (Yao et al., 2026), using the same datasets, data splits, and evaluation protocols. We evaluate ProbMoE across a diverse set of tasks, including mathematical reasoning on GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), legal-domain understanding, machine translation and sum-marization (Wang et al., 2024), and code generation. For the coding domain, we fine-tune on CodeAlpaca (Chaudhary, 2023) and evaluate on MBPP (Austin et al., 2021). Using the same CodeAlpaca fine-tuned model, we additionally report MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021) to assess general knowledge retention, with MMLU-Stem reported separately as a code-relevant subset. See Appendix A.3 for evaluation. 

7. Exact-k Routing Experiments 

This section evaluates ProbMoE under the exact-k routing setting across multiple backbones and tasks, comparing overall performance and routing behavior against baselines. As shown in Table 1, ProbMoE matches or outperforms strong baselines across backbones and tasks. In partic-ular, ProbMoE achieves state-of-the-art results on multi-ple benchmarks under both OLMoE and Qwen backbones, demonstrating the effectiveness of probabilistic subset rout-ing across diverse settings. These gains are notable given that ProbMoE preserves sparse expert execution and sparse expert-weight updates at both training and inference time, while providing dense learning signals only to the router, whereas DenseMixer introduces dense expert-side computa-tion and gradient updates during training. Performance on GSM under the Qwen backbone exhibits a different pattern: ProbMoE does not rank among the top three methods, but re-mains comparable to Conventional Routing. To understand when and why ProbMoE improves performance, we next analyze routing distributions and expert utilization. These analyses show that ProbMoE induces better-calibrated rout-ing distributions and more stable expert engagement than baseline methods thanks to the probabilistic framework. 

7.1. Ablation Study of the Probabilistic Framework 

To understand whether the gains of ProbMoE arise from stochastic expert sampling, marginal-based optimization, or       

> Figure 3. ProbMoE Exact-kactivates more diverse experts across layers on Qwen than Conventional and DenseMixer routing. We measure the minimum number of experts required to cumulatively account for 99% of the routing probability mass per token, using a random subset of Translation dataset ( N= 1 ,000 ).

their combination, we perform an ablation study where we decouple the forward routing mechanism from the backward gradient estimator. We evaluate four routing configurations on the OLMoE backbone, each fine-tuned over three inde-pendent random seeds: Routing variants: ProbMoE (Sam-ple + Marginal): stochastic sampling with exact marginal gradients; DenseMixer (Top-k + Dense STE): determinis-tic Top-k with dense STE gradients; Sample + Dense STE: stochastic sampling with STE gradients; Top-k + Marginal: deterministic Top-k with exact marginal gradients. As shown in Figure 2, the ProbMoE configuration achieves the highest mean Exact Match (EM) score (50.24%) with low variance ( σ ≈ 0.09 ). In contrast, the other combi-nations exhibit clear degradation. Sample + Dense STE 

reduces performance to 46.6% and substantially increases variance ( σ ≈ 0.37 ). These results indicate that the gains of ProbMoE stem from the alignment between probabilistic expert selection and marginal-based optimization. 

7.2. Analysis of Routing Distribution diversity 

To examine routing behavior beyond aggregate performance, we analyze how routing probability is distributed across ex-perts. Prior work show that highly concentrated routing can lead to expert collapse and inefficient use of model ca-pacity, whereas distributing probability mass more broadly encourages expert specialization and more stable training dynamics (Shazeer et al., 2017; Lepikhin et al., 2021; Zuo et al., 2022; Clark et al., 2022). Rather than focusing only on which experts are selected, we study how routing prob-ability accumulates across the ranked experts, providing a direct measure of routing diversity and expert utilization. Specifically, we measure how many experts are needed to account for a given fraction of the total routing probability for each token and layer. This cumulative view captures not only the most dominant experts but also the contribution of lower-ranked experts, offering a more complete picture of how broadly routing probability is distributed during inference. All statistics are computed per token and per 7ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts                 

> Figure 4. ProbMoE Exact-kyields less concentrated and more balanced expert assignment across layers on the Qwen-MoE translation dataset. The left panel reports the Top-4 assignment mass, defined as the fraction of assignments captured by the four most frequently used experts per layer, while the right panel shows the normalized entropy of the expert assignment distribution.
> Table 2. Performance of Dynamic-krelative to Exact-k. Values are reported as absolute EM differences , with the average fraction of experts used shown in parentheses. Dataset OLMoE Qwen1.5 GSM −1.82 (80 .00%) −4.29 (75 .00%)
> Law −0.04 (84 .50%) +2 .70 (75 .00%)
> Translation +0 .36 (82 .00%) +3 .22 (75 .00%)

layer, and then aggregated across tokens. Figure 3 and Figure 4 illustrate how routing probability mass is distributed across experts. Across both backbones, Prob-MoE requires a larger number of experts to reach the same cumulative mass threshold α, indicating broader routing support. This effect is especially pronounced on Qwen fine-tuned for Translation, which uses a large expert pool of 60 experts per layer while selecting only four experts per token. Under this highly competitive routing regime, ProbMoE consistently requires more experts to reach 99% cumula-tive probability mass across nearly all layers, particularly in deeper layers. Because small shifts in routing probability correspond to large changes in token allocation under such extreme sparsity, this pattern reflects a substantially wider routing distribution induced by ProbMoE. To further examine how routing probability is allocated within each layer, we analyze expert utilization on Qwen using Top-4 mass and normalized entropy. Top-4 mass is computed as the fraction of total expert assignments in a layer accounted for by the four most frequently used experts, while normalized entropy measures the overall evenness of the assignment distribution. As in Figure 4, ProbMoE ex-hibits lower Top-4 mass and higher normalized entropy across layers than both Conventional and DenseMixer rout-ing, indicating that expert traffic is distributed more evenly. In contrast, Conventional and DenseMixer routing produce highly peaked within-layer distributions, with a small num-ber of experts dominating token assignments. Taken together, these results indicate that ProbMoE exposes   

> Figure 5. Average routing cardinality at each layer under ProbMoE Dynamic-kwith OLMoE backbone on different datasets.

a broader set of experts to routing probability over the course of training. Rather than relying on a small group of con-sistently dominant experts, ProbMoE distributes routing probability more broadly, allowing a wider range of ex-perts to participate across prompts and layers. This broader routing distribution is consistent with ProbMoE’s marginal-based optimization. By propagating gradients through the expert-selection marginals in Equation (6) , ProbMoE pro-vides informative learning signals to the router even when only a sparse subset of experts is executed in the forward pass. This encourages routing probabilities to be shaped by the full subset distribution rather than only the selected ex-perts. More generally, broader expert participation is known to mitigate expert collapse and improve specialization, lead-ing to more stable training dynamics and better use of model capacity (Wu et al., 2024; Dai et al., 2024). We therefore attribute ProbMoE’s performance gains to broader expert utilization and reduced routing concentration. 

8. Dynamic Routing Experiments 

This section examines ProbMoE Dynamic-k routing, which relaxes the fixed-cardinality constraint and allows the model to adapt expert allocation to token-level routing uncertainty. In Table 2, ProbMoE Dynamic-k achieves performance com-parable to ProbMoE Exact-k while activating fewer experts, reflecting that adaptive cardinalities are learned during train-ing. This indicates that ProbMoE Dynamic-k can reduce the effective routing cost relative to ProbMoE Exact-k routing without substantially sacrificing task performance. 

8.1. Dynamic Routing vs. Token-Level Difficulty 

At the dataset level, ProbMoE Dynamic-k allocates system-atically different amounts of expert capacity across tasks depending on their difficulty. As shown in Figure 5, Law consistently activates more experts on average than Trans-lation, while GSM activates the fewest. This separation persists across layers, indicating that Dynamic-k learns task-specific routing budgets rather than enforcing a uniform expert-usage pattern, consistent with prior observations that different tasks exhibit distinct expert-allocation profiles in MoE models (Huang et al., 2024). 8ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts    

> Figure 6. Token frequency versus average expert activation un-der ProbMoE Dynamic-krouting (over 656k tokens). Tokens are ordered by increasing frequency. The solid curve shows the average number of active experts per token, while the shaded his-togram (right axis, log scale) shows token frequency. Dashed line indicates the expected activation under uniform expert assignment, with rarer tokens activating more experts than frequent ones.

Under ProbMoE Dynamic-k, each token activates a variable-size subset of experts, allowing the model to adaptively allocate computation under an explicit cardinality constraint. We analyze the relationship between token frequency and the average number of active experts to understand how this adaptivity is expressed at the token level. As shown in Figure 6, ProbMoE Dynamic-k consistently assigns a larger number of experts to rarer tokens, while routing more conservatively for frequent tokens. This rela-tionship is continuous rather than piecewise: average rout-ing cardinality varies gradually across the token frequency spectrum, rather than collapsing tokens into a small num-ber of discrete routing regimes. Qualitative inspection of representative tokens as in Table 6 reveals a clear semantic distinction. Tokens associated with higher routing cardi-nality include punctuation, morphological fragments, and context-sensitive symbols (e.g., :, ?, ons), whose meaning depends strongly on surrounding structure. In contrast, to-kens routed with fewer experts are typically numerals or se-mantically concrete words. This pattern suggests that Prob-MoE Dynamic-k allocates additional expert capacity to to-kens whose semantics are more ambiguous or composition-dependent, while effectively “compressing” the represen-tation of frequent, stable tokens by routing them through a smaller expert set. In contrast to approaches based on continuous expert mixing, ProbMoE realizes this adaptivity through probabilistic inference over discrete expert subsets, preserving sparse execution while allowing the compute budget itself to vary (Wang et al., 2025). 

8.2. Training–Inference Mismatch in Cardinality Usage 

Table 3 examines how different training-time routing and gradient mechanisms affect inference-time expert usage when all models are evaluated with the same dynamic-k

MAP inference rule. We focus on GSM under the OL-MoE backbone, where conventional MoE training uses the              

> Table 3. Dynamic inference with OLMoE on GSM ( k∈[4 ,8] ).
> Training Method EM (%) Avg. k
> ProbMoE (Dynamic-k)44.50 5.018 DenseMixer 38.97 5.292 Conventional 38.59 5.039

exact-k routing with k = 8 . Although DenseMixer and Conventional models are trained under an exact-k routing assumption, evaluating them under dynamic-k MAP infer-ence reveals that their learned routing distributions favor substantially smaller expert subsets on average. Importantly, this does not imply that these models fail to utilize all k = 8 

experts when exact-k inference is enforced; rather, it re-flects the concentration structure of the routing distribution learned during training. When the inference-time cardinality constraint is relaxed, MAP subset selection exposes this con-centration by selecting fewer experts with high probability. In contrast, ProbMoE is trained to explicitly model cardi-nality as part of the routing objective, leading to improved task performance under dynamic-k inference while main-taining a comparable average routing cardinality. These results highlight a mismatch between training-time cardi-nality constraints and the structure of the learned routing distribution in conventional exact-k training. While exact-k

enforces a fixed number of selected experts during training, it does not encourage the routing distribution itself to sup-port flexible expert allocation. As analyzed in Section 7.2, exact-k routing typically exhibits high utilization within the selected subset but produces highly peaked routing distri-butions. Under dynamic-k MAP inference, this peakiness manifests as smaller inferred expert subsets, consistent with prior observations in sparse MoE models (Shazeer et al., 2017; Lepikhin et al., 2021; Clark et al., 2022). 

9. Conclusions & Future Directions 

We propose to cast MoE routing as a probabilistic inference 

problem over discrete expert subsets under explicit cardi-nality constraints. By leveraging SIMPLE (Ahmed et al., 2023), ProbMoE enables tractable normalization and ex-act expert-selection marginals, yielding informative router gradients while preserving sparse computation. Under Prob-MoE Exact-k, this leads to improved expert utilization while preserving sparse computation. Extending this formulation to dynamic-k, we show that adaptive cardinality learned dur-ing training achieves performance comparable to ProbMoE Exact-k while activating fewer experts on average, adapt-ing naturally to token and task level complexity. Together, they demonstrate that modeling MoE routing probabilis-tically provides a principled method for expert selection. Future work includes extending ProbMoE to pre-training and system-level optimizations that fully exploit the sparsity in the dynamic setting. 9ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts 

Acknowledgments 

We would like to thank Feng Yao for the helpful discussion. The authors acknowledge the Research Computing at the University of Virginia. This work was funded in part by the DARPA ANSR and CODORD programs under awards FA8750-23-2-0004 and HR00112590089, and gifts from Cisco Research, Qualcomm, and Amazon. Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose primary goal is to advance the methodological foundations of Mixture-of-Experts rout-ing in machine learning models. By providing a principled probabilistic framework for discrete and adaptive expert selection, our work aims to improve training stability, in-terpretability, and computational efficiency in large-scale neural architectures. As such, the potential societal impacts of this work are largely indirect and consistent with those of prior advances in scalable machine learning systems. Im-proved routing mechanisms may enable more efficient use of computational resources and facilitate the deployment of large models under constrained budgets. At the same time, as with other improvements to model capacity and ef-ficiency, downstream applications may inherit existing risks associated with large language models, including misuse or unintended biases, which are orthogonal to the contributions of this paper. We do not identify any new ethical concerns introduced specifically by the proposed routing framework beyond those already present in the broader deployment of machine learning models. 

References 

Aghdam, M. A., Jin, H., and Wu, Y. Da-moe: Towards dynamic expert allocation for mixture-of-experts models. 

CoRR , abs/2409.06669, 2024. Ahmed, K., Zeng, Z., Niepert, M., and den Broeck, G. V. SIMPLE: A gradient estimator for k-subset sampling. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Austin, J., Odena, A., Nye, M., Bosma, M., Michalewski, H., Dohan, D., Jiang, E., Cai, C., Terry, M., Le, Q., and Sutton, C. Program synthesis with large language models, 2021. Bengio, Y., L ´eonard, N., and Courville, A. Estimating or propagating gradients through stochastic neurons for con-ditional computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432 ,2013. Chaudhary, S. Code alpaca: An instruction-following llama model for code generation. https://github.com/ sahil280114/codealpaca , 2023. Clark, A., de Las Casas, D., Guy, A., Mensch, A., Paganini, M., Hoffmann, J., Damoc, B., Hechtman, B., Cai, T., Borgeaud, S., et al. Unified scaling laws for routed lan-guage models. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 4057–4086. PMLR, 2022. Cobbe, K., Kosaraju, V., Bavarian, M., Chen, M., Jun, H., Kaiser, L., Plappert, M., Tworek, J., Hilton, J., Nakano, R., et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 , 2021. Dai, D., Deng, C., Zhao, C., Xu, R., Gao, H., Chen, D., Li, J., Zeng, W., Yu, X., Wu, Y., Xie, Z., Li, Y., Huang, P., Luo, F., Ruan, C., Sui, Z., and Liang, W. DeepSeek-MoE: Towards ultimate expert specialization in mixture-of-experts language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) . Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. Du, N., Huang, Y., Dai, A. M., Tong, S., Lepikhin, D., Xu, Y., Krikun, M., Zhou, Y., Yu, A. W., Firat, O., et al. Glam: Efficient scaling of language models with mixture-of-experts. In International conference on machine learning ,pp. 5547–5569. PMLR, 2022. Fedus, W., Zoph, B., and Shazeer, N. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter models with simple and ef-ficient sparsity. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,23(120):1–39, 2022. Gao, L., Tow, J., Abbasi, B., Biderman, S., Black, S., DiPofi, A., Foster, C., Golding, L., Hsu, J., Le Noac’h, A., Li, H., McDonell, K., Muennighoff, N., Ociepa, C., Phang, J., Reynolds, L., Schoelkopf, H., Skowron, A., Sutawika, L., Tang, E., Thite, A., Wang, B., Wang, K., and Zou, A. The language model evaluation harness, 07 2024. Guo, Y., Cheng, Z., Tang, X., Tu, Z., and Lin, T. Dynamic mixture of experts: An auto-tuning approach for efficient transformer models. In The Thirteenth International Con-ference on Learning Representations , 2025. Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Basart, S., Zou, A., Mazeika, M., Song, D., and Steinhardt, J. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Huang, Q., An, Z., Zhuang, N., Tao, M., Zhang, C., Jin, Y., Xu, K., Xu, K., Chen, L., Huang, S., and Feng, Y. Harder task needs more experts: Dynamic routing in MoE models. In Ku, L.-W., Martins, A., and Srikumar, V. (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: 

10 ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts 

Long Papers) . Association for Computational Linguistics, August 2024. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.696. Jang, E., Gu, S., and Poole, B. Categorical reparameteriza-tion with gumbel-softmax. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017. Jiang, A. Q., Sablayrolles, A., Roux, A., Mensch, A., Savary, B., Bamford, C., Chaplot, D. S., Casas, D. d. l., Hanna, E. B., Bressand, F., et al. Mixtral of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088 , 2024. Jin, C., Peng, H., Xiang, M., Zhang, Q., Yuan, X., Hasan, A., Dibua, O., Gong, Y., Kang, Y., and Metaxas, D. N. Sparsity-controllable dynamic top-p moe for large founda-tion model pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13996 ,2025a. Jin, P., Zhu, B., Yuan, L., and YAN, S. Moe++: Accelerat-ing mixture-of-experts methods with zero-computation experts. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025b. Lepikhin, D., Lee, H., Xu, Y., Chen, D., Firat, O., Huang, Y., Krikun, M., Shazeer, N., and Chen, Z. {GS }hard: Scaling giant models with conditional computation and automatic sharding. In International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations , 2021. Lewis, M., Bhosale, S., Dettmers, T., Goyal, N., and Zettle-moyer, L. Base layers: Simplifying training of large, sparse models. In Meila, M. and Zhang, T. (eds.), Pro-ceedings of the 38th International Conference on Ma-chine Learning , volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 6265–6274. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. Liu, L., Gao, J., and Chen, W. Sparse backpropagation for moe training. In Workshop on Advancing Neural Network Training: Computational Efficiency, Scalability, and Re-source Optimization (WANT@NeurIPS 2023) , 2023. Maddison, C. J., Mnih, A., and Teh, Y. W. The concrete distribution: A continuous relaxation of discrete random variables. In International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations , 2017. Muennighoff, N., Soldaini, L., Groeneveld, D., Lo, K., Mor-rison, J., Min, S., Shi, W., Walsh, E. P., Tafjord, O., Lambert, N., Gu, Y., Arora, S., Bhagia, A., Schwenk, D., Wadden, D., Wettig, A., Hui, B., Dettmers, T., Kiela, D., Farhadi, A., Smith, N. A., Koh, P. W., Singh, A., and Ha-jishirzi, H. OLMoe: Open mixture-of-experts language models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Panda, A., Baherwani, V., Sarwar, Z., Th ´erien, B., Rawls, S., Sahu, S., Goldstein, T., and Chakraborty, S. Dense back-propagation improves routing for sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts, 2025. Qian, C., Manolache, A., Ahmed, K., Zeng, Z., Van den Broeck, G., Niepert, M., and Morris, C. Probabilistically rewired message-passing neural networks. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pp. 32051–32076, 2024. Rajbhandari, S., Li, C., Yao, Z., Zhang, M., Aminabadi, R. Y., Awan, A. A., Rasley, J., and He, Y. Deepspeed-moe: Advancing mixture-of-experts inference and training to power next-generation ai scale. In International con-ference on machine learning , pp. 18332–18346. PMLR, 2022. Shabgahi, S. Z., Samragh, M., Nishu, K., Hannah, L., Kundu, A., and Cho, M. Moes are stronger than you think: Hyper-parallel inference scaling with roe, 2026. Shazeer, N., Mirhoseini, A., Maziarz, K., Davis, A., Le, Q., Hinton, G., and Dean, J. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538 , 2017. Shukla, V., Zeng, Z., Ahmed, K., and Van den Broeck, G. A unified approach to count-based weakly supervised learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:38709–38722, 2023. Team, Q. Introducing qwen1.5, February 2024. URL 

https://qwenlm.github.io/blog/qwen1. 5/ .Wang, Z., Chen, D., Dai, D., Xu, R., Li, Z., and Wu, Y. Let the expert stick to his last: Expert-specialized fine-tuning for sparse architectural large language mod-els. In Al-Onaizan, Y., Bansal, M., and Chen, Y.-N. (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . Association for Computational Linguistics, November 2024. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.46. Wang, Z., Zhu, J., and Chen, J. Remoe: Fully differentiable mixture-of-experts with reLU routing. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. Wu, X., Huang, S., Wang, W., Ma, S., Dong, L., and Wei, F. Multi-head mixture-of-experts. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. Yao, F., Cui, J., Zhang, R., Liu, L., Hao, S., Zhang, L., Dong, C., Zhi, C., Wang, S., yelong shen, Gao, J., and Shang, J. Densemixer: Improving moe post-training with precise router gradient, 2026. 11 ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts 

Yue, T., Guo, L., Cheng, J., Gao, X., Huang, H., and Liu, J. Ada-k routing: Boosting the efficiency of moe-based LLMs. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Zeng, Z., Miao, Y., Gao, H., Zhang, H., and Deng, Z. AdaMoE: Token-adaptive routing with null experts for mixture-of-experts language models. In Al-Onaizan, Y., Bansal, M., and Chen, Y.-N. (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pp. 6223–6235, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-emnlp.361. Zuo, S., Liu, X., Jiao, J., Kim, Y. J., Hassan, H., Zhang, R., Gao, J., and Zhao, T. Taming sparsely activated transformer with stochastic experts. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations , 2022. 12 ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts 

A. Methodological and Implementation Details 

A.1. DenseMixer: Dense Training-Time Routing 

DenseMixer addresses the non-differentiability of top-k routing by modifying gradient propagation during training (Yao et al., 2026). Rather than modeling expert subset selection directly, it introduces a straight-through approximation that alters how gradients are propagated through the routing decision. Concretely, DenseMixer augments the softmax routing gradient with an identity term on the selected experts, yielding an approximate gradient of the form: 

∂L

∂r i

≈ X

> j∈E

D ∂L

∂y , f j (x)

E ˜Jj,i , (10) where 

˜Jj,i = ∂π j

∂r i

+ I[j ∈ Stop-k] I[i = j] (11) augments the softmax Jacobian with a straight-through term that treats the top-k selection as an identity mapping on the selected coordinates during backpropagation. This allows gradients to flow to all experts during training, while inference-time routing remains unchanged. 

A.2. Training Protocol 

All methods are trained using the same optimizer, learning rate schedules, batch sizes, precision settings, and routing hyperparameters as DenseMixer. For most datasets, we adopt the same number of training epochs as in the original setup. Due to the increased optimization difficulty introduced by stochastic routing, ProbMoE occasionally requires additional training steps to reach stable convergence; in these cases, we extend training to up to 8 epochs while keeping all other hyperparameters fixed. MMLU-overall and MMLU-stem are evaluated using the fine-tuned model on the CodeAlpaca dataset.                                     

> Table 4. Training configurations for MoE models (full fine-tuning only). We follow the exact setup of Yao et al. (2026). Model Method Batch Size (BS) Learning Rate (LR) Qwen1.5-MoE Full {32 ,64 ,128 }{5e −7, . . . , 4e −5}
> OLMoE Full {64 ,128 ,256 ,512 }{5e −7, . . . , 4e −5}
> Table 5. Training and evaluation sample counts for each dataset. Dataset Training Samples Test Samples GSM 7,473 1,319 Law 927 100 Translation 11,639 100 Summary 19,578 100 CodeAlpaca 22,000 –MBPP –500 MMLU-Overall –14,042 MMLU-Stem –3,153

A.3. Evaluation Protocol 

We evaluate each task using the following protocols. 

Exact Match. GSM8K is evaluated using Exact Match (EM) accuracy, where a prediction is counted as correct if and only if it exactly matches the ground-truth answer string after normalization. 13 ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts 

LLM-as-Judge. Law, Translation, and Summary are evaluated using GPT-4o-mini 1 as an automated judge. The judge is prompted to score each model output against the reference answer, and the resulting scores are averaged across the test set. 

LM Evaluation Harness. MMLU and MBPP are evaluated using the EleutherAI Language Model Evaluation Harness (Gao et al., 2024) 2 under its default task configurations. 

B. Theoretical Derivations 

Theorem B.1. Let Zk be the normalizing constant as in Equation (4) . Then the range-constrained normalizing constant, 

Z∗ =

> kmax

X

> k=kmin

Zk

can be computed in time O(N k max ). Moreover, it admits a vectorized complexity O(log N log kmax ) assuming perfect parallelization. Proof. By definition, the Dynamic-k normalizing constant sums the Bernoulli subset mass over all subsets whose cardinality lies in the band: 

Z∗ = X 

> S⊆[N]
> kmin ≤| S|≤ kmax

Y

> j∈S

pj

Y

> j / ∈S

(1 − pj ).

Grouping subsets by their cardinality gives 

Z∗ =

> kmax

X

> k=kmin

X 

> S⊆[N]
> |S|=k

Y

> j∈S

pj

Y

> j / ∈S

(1 − pj )=

> kmax

X

> k=kmin

Zk.

Following SIMPLE (Ahmed et al., 2023), each Zk can be computed by a dynamic program. Let A(i, k ) be the probability of selecting exactly k experts among the first i experts. Then 

A(i, k ) = piA(i − 1, k − 1) + (1 − pi)A(i − 1, k ),

with boundary conditions A(0 , 0) = 1 and A(0 , k ) = 0 for k > 0. After filling the table for all i ≤ N and k ≤ kmax , we have A(N, k ) = Zk. Therefore, 

Z∗ =

> kmax

X

> k=kmin

A(N, k ).

The dynamic program has O(N k max ) entries, and each entry is computed in constant time, so Zkmin :kmax can be computed in O(N k max ) time. 

Proposition B.2. Let Z∗ denote the normalizing constant over all subsets satisfying kmin ≤ | S| ≤ kmax . For each expert j,the marginal probability under the range-constrained distribution satisfies that 

m∗ 

> j

≜ Pr (zj = 1 | kmin ≤ | S| ≤ kmax ) = ∂ log Z∗

∂ log pj

.

Proof. By definition, the range normalizing constant sums the Bernoulli subset mass over all feasible subsets: 

Z∗ = X 

> S⊆[N]
> kmin ≤| S|≤ kmax

Y

> e∈S

pe

Y

> e / ∈S

(1 − pe).

> 1

gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 

> 2

https://github.com/EleutherAI/lm-evaluation-harness 

14 ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts 

Differentiating Z∗ with respect to log pj , and treating the non-selection factor (1 −pj ) as constant in log pj (the stop-gradient convention of SIMPLE(Ahmed et al., 2023)), only the subsets containing expert j contribute. Since ∂p j /∂ log pj = pj , the factor pj in each such subset is reproduced, giving the unnormalized mass of feasible subsets that include j:

∂Z ∗

∂ log pj

= X 

> S⊆[N]
> kmin ≤| S|≤ kmax , j ∈S

Y

> e∈S

pe

Y

> e / ∈S

(1 − pe).

The conditional probability of including expert j under the range constraint is the probability mass of feasible subsets that contain j, normalized by the total feasible mass: 

Pr (j ∈ S | kmin ≤ | S| ≤ kmax ) = 

P S⊆[N ]

> kmin ≤| S|≤ kmax , j ∈S

Q 

> e∈S

pe

Q 

> e / ∈S

(1 − pe)

Z∗ .

Using the previous identity, the numerator is Z∗   

> ∂log pj

. Therefore, 

Pr (j ∈ S | kmin ≤ | S| ≤ kmax ) = 1

Z∗

∂Z ∗

∂ log pj

.

Finally, applying the chain rule to the logarithm gives 

∂ log Z∗

∂ log pj

= ∂ log Z∗

∂Z ∗

∂Z ∗

∂ log pj

= 1

Z∗

∂Z ∗

∂ log pj

.

Combining the two identities yields 

∂ log Z∗

∂ log pj

= Pr (j ∈ S | kmin ≤ | S| ≤ kmax ).

C. Choosing the Dynamic-k Range 

The range [kmin , k max ] controls the allowable per-token compute budget for ProbMoE Dynamic-k routing. The upper bound 

kmax determines the maximum number of experts that can be activated for any token, and can therefore be chosen according to the available compute budget or latency constraint. Setting a smaller kmax enforces a stricter upper bound on routing cost, while a larger kmax allows the model to allocate additional capacity to tokens with higher routing uncertainty or task-specific complexity. The lower bound kmin determines the minimum number of experts that remain active for each token. In practice, this value can be selected based on stability and capacity considerations. A very small kmin may reduce computation, but can also make routing overly sparse and limit expert participation. A larger kmin ensures a minimum level of expert usage, which can be helpful when the task requires broader representation capacity or when stable routing behavior is desired. Together, kmin and kmax define the range over which ProbMoE Dynamic-k can adapt its routing cardinality. This range provides a direct way to balance adaptive expert allocation with explicit control over computational cost. In our experiments, we choose the range so that kmax matches the original fixed-k budget of the backbone, while kmin allows the model to reduce the number of active experts when fewer experts are sufficient. 

D. Extended ProbMoE Dynamic-k table 

15 ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts   

> Table 6. Dynamic routing expert analysis. Examples for top/bottom 20% experts by average k.

Avg. Active Experts Examples Top 20% \n, :, ?, ons, eli Bottom 20% 16, 5, downward, Meat, reduce 

E. Wall-Clock/GPU-Memory Analysis  

> Figure 7. Wall-clock and memory analysis on the GSM fine-tuning task. Comparison across Conventional fine-tuning, DenseMixer, ProbMoE DP, and ProbMoE SDD on OLMoE-1B-7B. (a) Per-step throughput in tokens per second over 30 training steps. (b) Steady-state per-step compute time. (c) End-to-end wall-clock time. (d) Peak GPU memory per GPU. Values in parentheses denote ratios relative to Conventional.

Figure 7 reports per-step throughput, steady-state per-step compute, end-to-end training time, and peak GPU memory for the four methods on the GSM fine-tuning task. ProbMoE SDD nearly matches Conventional fine-tuning across all three time-based metrics, with only a marginal slowdown in per-step compute and end-to-end wall-clock. ProbMoE SDD is the optimized variant of ProbMoE DP detailed in Algorithm 4. In terms of peak GPU memory, ProbMoE DP and ProbMoE SDD closely match Conventional fine-tuning, whereas DenseMixer requires substantially more memory than any other method. DenseMixer requires a dense forward pass through all experts for every token in order to compute its straight-through gradient, dramatically increasing forward-pass FLOPs. In contrast, ProbMoE’s routing optimization operates over N scalar routing logits with O(N · kmax ) complexity, which is substantially cheaper than running full FFN computations for all inactive experts. 

F. Gradient variance comparison  

> Table 7. Comparison of aggregated bias, variance, and gradient error between ProbMoE and DenseMixer on a synthetic MoE task.

Model Aggregated Bias Aggregated Variance Aggregated Error 

ProbMoE 0.0702 ± 0.0426 0.0076 ± 0.0110 0.0967 ± 0.0659 

DenseMixer 0.1052 ± 0.0839 0.0201 ± 0.0427 0.1349 ± 0.0995 

Calculating exact ground-truth gradients on real data is intractable. In order to accurately measure an estimator’s bias and variance for a comprehensive comparison, we consider a controlled setting where the true gradient is known. We carry out a synthetic experiment with a top-K distribution over n = 10 experts and k = 5 , yielding C(10 , 5) = 252 possible subsets, making the exact gradient tractable in closed form. The setup simulates T = 10 tokens with per-token router logits to mimic real MoE behavior, and we compare DenseMixer against ProbMoE. We measure bias, variance, and average error via cosine distance, a widely adopted metric for assessing gradient variance (Ahmed et al., 2023), against the exact gradient over 10,000 samples across 10 random seeds. As shown in Table 7, ProbMoE consistently outperforms DenseMixer across all three metrics, achieving lower variance, lower bias, and lower overall gradient error, confirming that ProbMoE’s marginal-based estimator provides a more accurate and stable approximation of the true gradient. 16 ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts 

G. ProbMoE Dynamic-k Chain-DP Implementation 

We summarize the overall P ROB MOE Dynamic-k framework in Algorithm 1, the core probabilistic sampling and marginal computation logic in Algorithm 2, and the deterministic Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) routing procedure used for inference in Algorithm 3. 

Algorithm 1 PROB MOE(H, k min , k max ): ProbMoE Dynamic-k Routing for MoE 

input Token states H ∈ RT ×d, router logits r, kmin , k max 

output Selected experts I, routing weights w

if training then 

(z, k, μ ) ← BAND KC ORE (r, k min , k max ) {Alg. 2 }

π ← softmax( r)

m ← stopgrad( z − μ) + μ {Straight-through estimator over full vector, cf. Eq. (7) }

wfull ← m ⊙ πI ← TOP KI NDICES (z, k max )

w ← wfull |I

else 

Find the MAP set of experts {Alg. 3 }

end if return I, w 

17 ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts 

Algorithm 2 BAND KC ORE (r, k min , k max )

input Router logits r ∈ RT ×N , band [kmin , k max ]

output Sampled masks S ∈ { 0, 1}T ×N , sampled cardinalities k ∈ { kmin , . . . , k max }T , marginals μ ∈ [0 , 1] T ×N

log p ← log σ(r)log q ← log(1 − exp(log p)) 

a ← PRUPTOK(log p, log q, E, k max )

k ← SAMPLE BAND K(a, k min , k max )

S ← SAMPLE EXACT KD YNAMIC (a, log p, k )

μ ← MARGINALS BAND (r, k min , k max )

return S, k, μ 

function PRUPTOK(log p, log q, n, k max )

initialize a[i, j ] ← −∞ for all i, j a[0 , 0] ← 0 {log A(0 , 0) = log 1 = 0 ; A(0 , k ) = 0 for k > 0, cf. Prop. B.1 }

for i = 1 to n do for j = 0 to kmax do 

a[i, j ] = logaddexp  a[i − 1, j − 1] + log pi, a [i − 1, j ] + log qi



end end return a

function SAMPLE BAND K(a, k min , k max )

ℓ ← a[n, k min ], a [n, k min + 1] , . . . , a [n, k max ]

ρ ← softmax( ℓ)

sample j ∼ Categorical( ρ)

k ← j + kmin 

return k

function SAMPLE EXACT KD YNAMIC (a, log p, k )

j ← k, z ← [ ] 

for i = n to 1 do 

πi ←  a[i − 1, j − 1] + log pi

 − a[i, j ] {Log conditional: include expert i given j still needed }

zi ∼ Bernoulli( σ(πi)) 

if zi = 1 then j ← j − 1

append zi to z

end return z

function MARGINALS BAND (r, k min , k max )log p ← log σ(r)log q ← log(1 − exp(log p)) 

a ← PRUPTOK(log p, log q, E, k max )

L ← P 

> t

logsumexp  a[n, k min ], . . . , a [n, k max ]

μ ← ∇ log p L

return μ

18 ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts 

Algorithm 3 Deterministic Top-k Routing 

Input: Logits θ ∈ RB×N , range limits kmin , k max 

Output: Indices I ∈ ZB×kmax , Weights W ∈ RB×kmax 

π ← Softmax( θ, axis=1) (Iall , s sorted ) ← SortDescending( π, axis=1) {Iall : sorted indices; ssorted : corresponding sorted π values }

C ← PrefixSum( ssorted , axis=1) 

k∗ ← arg max k∈{ kmin ,...,k max } C[: , k ]

I ← Iall [: , 1 : kmax ]

for i = 1 to B do for j = 1 to kmax do if j ≤ k∗ 

> i

then 

Wi,j ← πi, I i,j 

else 

Wi,j ← 0

end if end for end for return I, W 

H. ProbMoE Exact-k Efficient SDD-Based Implementation 

The chain-DP formulation in Algorithm 2 rebuilds its DP table from scratch at every forward pass. We additionally provide an optimized implementation that compiles the exactly-k constraint once into a Sentential Decision Diagram (SDD) and reuses the compiled circuit thereafter. Both implementations are mathematically equivalent: they compute identical per-variable marginals and draw samples from the same constrained distribution. We summarize the overall optimized ProbMoE fixed-k framework in Algorithm 4, the core circuit-based sampling and marginal computation logic in Algorithm 5, and the deterministic top-k routing procedure used for inference in Algorithm 7. The exactly-k-of-n constraint is compiled once into a Sentential Decision Diagram (SDD) β via Algorithm 6; the resulting circuit is reused for every forward pass at training time. 

Algorithm 4 PROB MOE-SDD (H, k, β ): Fixed-k Circuit Routing for MoE 

input Token states H ∈ RT ×d, router logits r ∈ RT ×N , top-k value k, compiled SDD root β

output Selected experts I, routing weights w

if training then 

(z, μ ) ← SDDC ORE (r, k, β ) {Alg. 5 }

π ← softmax( r)

m ← stopgrad( z − μ) + μ {Straight-through estimator, cf. Eq. (7) }

wfull ← m ⊙ πI ← TOP KI NDICES (z, k ) {z has exactly k ones per row }

w ← wfull |I

else 

(I, w ) ← deterministic top-k routing {Alg. 7 }

end if return I, w 

19 ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts 

Algorithm 5 SDDC ORE (r, k, β )

input Router logits r ∈ RT ×N , cardinality k, compiled SDD root β encoding P 

> i

xi = k

output Sampled masks z ∈ { 0, 1}T ×N with P 

> i

zi = k, marginals μ ∈ [0 , 1] T ×N where μt,i = Pr[ xi = 1 | P 

> j

xj = k]log p ← log σ(r)log q ← log(1 − exp(log p)) {Numerically-stable log1mexp ; treated as stop-grad }

log Z ← CIRCUIT UPWARD (log p, log q, β )

μ ← ∇ log p log Z {Marginal trick; via autograd or C IRCUIT DOWNWARD }

z ← CIRCUIT SAMPLE (log p, log q, β )

return z, μ 

function CIRCUIT UPWARD (log p, log q, β )

for each literal node ℓ+ 

> i

do v[ℓ+ 

> i

] ← log pi

for each literal node ℓ− 

> i

do v[ℓ− 

> i

] ← log qi

for each level L of β, leaves → root do for each decomposition node n ∈ L with elements {(pj , s j )}j do 

θ[n, j ] ← v[pj ] + v[sj ] {Element log-weights; pj , sj are prime/sub children of n}

v[n] ← logsumexp j θ[n, j ]

θ[n, ·] ← θ[n, ·] − v[n] {Cache normalized log-conditionals }

end return v[β] {log Z = log-partition under constraint }

function CIRCUIT DOWNWARD (β, θ ) {Direct first-order marginals; alternative to autograd }

g[β] ← 0; g[n] ← −∞ for all other nodes 

for each level L of β, root → leaves do for each decomposition node n ∈ L with elements {(pj , s j )}j do for each element index j do {Distribute message from n to its prime/sub children }

g[pj ] ← logsumexp  g[pj ], g [n] + θ[n, j ]

g[sj ] ← logsumexp  g[sj ], g [n] + θ[n, j ]

end end 

μi ← exp  g[ℓ+ 

> i

] for each variable i

return μ

function CIRCUIT SAMPLE (log p, log q, β ) {Exact ancestral sample from Pr[ · | P 

> i

xi = k]}

Run C IRCUIT UPWARD to populate θ

active[ β] ← 1; active[ n] ← 0 for all other nodes 

for each level L of β, root → leaves do for each decomposition node n ∈ L with active[ n] > 0 do 

sample element index j∗ ∼ softmax j θ[n, j ]active[ pj∗ ] += 1 ; active[ sj∗ ] += 1 {Accumulate; subgraphs are shared }

end 

zi ← ⊮[active[ ℓ+ 

> i

] > 0] for each variable i

return z

20 ProbMoE: Differentiable Probabilistic Routing for Mixture-of-Experts 

Algorithm 6 COMPILE EXACTLY K(n, k ): One-time SDD construction 

input Number of experts n (power of two), cardinality k

output SDD root β encoding Pni=1 xi = k

create literal nodes ℓ+ 

> i

, ℓ − 

> i

for i = 1 , . . . , n 

dp prev [i, 0] ← ℓ− 

> i

, dp prev [i, 1] ← ℓ+ 

> i

for i = 1 , . . . , n m ← n

while m > 1 do 

m ← m/ 2

for i = 0 to m − 1 do for j = 0 to min( k, n/m ) do 

E ← (dp prev [2 i, j ′], dp prev [2 i + 1 , j − j′]) : 0 ≤ j′ ≤ j

dp curr [i, j ] ← LOOKUP ORCREATE (E) {Hash-cons to deduplicate shared subgraphs }

end for end for 

dp prev ← dp curr 

end while return dp prev [0 , k ]

Algorithm 7 Deterministic Top-k Routing (SDD inference) 

Input: Logits θ ∈ RB×N , fixed cardinality k

Output: Indices I ∈ ZB×k, Weights W ∈ RB×k

π ← Softmax( θ, axis=1) 

I ← TopKIndices( π, k, axis=1) 

W ← Gather( π, I )

return I, W 

21