Title: Sparse Mixture-of-Experts Reward Models Learn Interpretable and Specialized Experts for Personalized Preference Modeling

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.04284v1

Published Time: Thu, 04 Jun 2026 00:20:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Sparse Mixture-of-Experts Reward Models Learn Interpretable and Specialized Experts for Personalized Preference Modeling 

Yifan Wang 1, Jinyi Mu 2, Mayank Jobanputra 1, Yu Wang 3,Ji-Ung Lee 1, Soyoung Oh 1, Isabel Valera 1,4 , Vera Demberg 1,5  

> 1

Saarland University 2 Independent Researcher 3 Bielefeld University  

> 4

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems 5 Max Planck Institute for Informatics 

yifwang@lst.uni-saarland.de 

Abstract 

Preference modeling plays a central role in reinforcement learning from human feed-back (RLHF), enabling large language models (LLMs) to align with human values. However, most existing approaches assume a universal re-ward function, neglecting the diversity and het-erogeneity of human preferences. To address this limitation without additional annotation costs, recent work has proposed learning mul-tiple preference components from binary data and combining them to model individual pref-erences. Nevertheless, these components often fail to capture coherent and disentangled pat-terns, limiting their interpretability and effec-tiveness for personalization. In this work, we propose a sparse Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) re-ward model that encourages sparse routing and expert diversity during training on binary pref-erence data. Across controlled and real-world experiments, sparse MoE learns interpretable routing patterns and specialized experts. It also improves test-time personalization, and post-adaptation shifts in expert weights provide a qualitative lens for analyzing how the model adapts to personalized preferences. 

1 Introduction 

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) has become a central paradigm for training large language models (LLMs) (Bai et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023; Kaufmann et al., 2025). It often relies on reward models to capture human prefer-ences and align LLMs with human values (Ziegler et al., 2019). However, most existing reward mod-els are trained as single, global functions, im-plicitly assuming a unified notion of human val-ues (Yu et al., 2025; Wu, 2025). In reality, human preferences are inherently pluralistic and hetero-geneous (Chakraborty et al., 2024; Siththaranjan et al., 2024). As a result, these models may fail to capture such diversity, limiting their effectiveness for personalized alignment (Zhang et al., 2025). To better model heterogeneous preferences, prior work has explored incorporating additional su-pervision signals (Wu et al., 2023; Quan, 2024). These approaches often train multiple reward mod-els, each corresponding to a different attribute or user group, and combine them with adaptive weights to model unseen preferences. While ef-fective, they require costly curated annotations and rely on pre-defined preference dimensions, limiting scalability and flexibility. Synthetic data can alleviate these costs, but may suffer from re-duced validity. To avoid annotation costs, recent data-driven approaches instead learn multiple com-ponents directly from binary data to infer latent preference structures (Lee et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2025; Shen et al., 2025). However, without explicit interpretability-oriented design, these components often capture entangled and incoherent patterns that are difficult for humans to understand. As a result, the learned preferences are harder to audit, and the adaptation process becomes less transparent. More-over, such entanglement in the learned patterns can limit how effectively these components can be combined to model diverse individual preferences. In this work, we aim to learn preference com-ponents that are both interpretable and useful for effective personalization. Specifically, we propose a sparse Mixture-of-Experts (MoE; Shazeer et al., 2017) reward model trained solely on binary prefer-ence data. As illustrated in Figure 1, we explicitly encourage sparse routing and expert diversity dur-ing training, so that different experts specialize in distinct and human-interpretable domains. These interpretable and specialized experts can then serve as disentangled building blocks for personalization, enabling efficient adaptation to individual prefer-ences through lightweight router updates. Controlled experiments show that sparse MoE recovers latent semantic structure in the data with-out direct supervision, and leverages its special-ized experts for effective post-hoc preference steer-1  

> arXiv:2606.04284v1 [cs.LG] 2 Jun 2026 Figure 1: Illustration of the pipeline for training a sparse MoE reward model, interpreting its experts, adapting it to individual preferences and inspecting the adaptation. An MoE reward model is trained on standard binary preference data with interpretability regularization, and its experts can be interpreted by summarizing their top-activating examples. During test time, the router can be fine-tuned to fit personalized preferences, while changes in routing weights provide a qualitative view of how the model adapts to these preferences.

ing. On real-world preference datasets, experts re-main interpretable when analyzed through their top-activating examples, and both automatic and hu-man evaluations confirm the strong interpretability of sparse MoE. Furthermore, with only 50 adapta-tion examples, sparse MoE achieves a 25.81-point improvement in test-time personalization for indi-vidual preferences, substantially outperforming all baselines. Besides, post-adaptation shifts in expert weights often show plausible semantic associations with target preferences, offering a promising way to inspect model adaptation behavior. 

2 Related Work 

Personalization in Preference Modeling Most existing reward models are trained to reflect univer-sal human values, yet they often fail to capture their heterogeneous nature (Yu et al., 2025; Wu, 2025). Consequently, they are not well-suited for aligning LLMs to individualized preferences (Chakraborty et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025). Many recent ap-proaches address this limitation by incorporating additional supervision signals. Attribute-based ap-proaches leverage multi-faceted human annotations over diverse attributes, such as humor and creativ-ity, to train multiple reward models corresponding to different preference dimensions and reweight them for personalization (Wang et al., 2024a; Quan, 2024; Wang et al., 2024b; Zhou et al., 2024; Wu and Lu, 2026). In parallel, user-based approaches learn user prototypes from user-specific labels, en-abling unseen users to be represented as mixtures over these prototypes with limited supervision at test time (Zhao et al., 2024; Choi et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025; Balepur et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025). While effective, these two types of approaches de-pend heavily on fine-grained human annotations or user-specific labels, both of which are costly to obtain. Synthetic data offers a partial alterna-tive, but often suffers from limited reliability and fidelity (Ryan et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025). Be-sides, attribute-based methods are constrained by pre-defined attribute spaces, and thus may not cap-ture the full diversity of real-world preferences. To overcome these challenges, recent work has explored learning from binary preference datasets without additional supervision. Some approaches introduce latent user variables into preference mod-eling: Poddar et al. (2024) employ variational au-toencoders, while Chidambaram et al. (2026) use expectation-maximization to infer user prototypes. Another line of work learns multiple reward compo-nents from binary data to capture latent preference patterns, and adapts their composition to reflect in-dividual preferences. For instance, Lee et al. (2024) train an ensemble of reward models, while Luo et al. (2025) decompose response representations via principal component analysis. The work most closely related to ours is MiCRo (Shen et al., 2025), which trains an MoE reward model on standard preference data and fine-tunes the router to cap-ture context-aware preferences. However, without explicit interpretability mechanisms, existing ap-2proaches generally fail to relate their learned com-ponents to disentangled and semantically meaning-ful patterns, making them suboptimal for transpar-ent and personalized preference modeling. 

Interpretability through Sparsity and MoE 

Despite the broad success of LLMs, understanding their internal behavior remains challenging (Bom-masani et al., 2021). A key difficulty is superposi-tion, where multiple features are compressed into a limited number of neurons, leading to entangled representations (Elhage et al., 2022). Prior work has shown that enforcing sparsity can help disentan-gle representations and recover more interpretable units (Bricken et al., 2023; Templeton et al., 2024). For example, sparse autoencoders (SAEs) project model representations into a higher-dimensional space under sparsity constraints, yielding more monosemantic features (Karvonen et al., 2025; Shu et al., 2025). These features can then be interpreted by using LLMs to summarize highly activating in-puts. Recent studies have explored training reward functions on SAE features to improve interpretabil-ity (Movva et al., 2026; Liu et al., 2026; Zhang et al., 2026). However, these approaches often fol-low a two-stage pipeline, where features are first identified separately and then used for reward mod-eling. This separation may incur additional training costs and limit their alignment with target prefer-ences. In contrast, our method directly builds inter-pretable modularity into reward models, enabling flexible preference modeling and adaptation. In parallel, MoE architectures have emerged as an effective paradigm for scaling LLMs (Cai et al., 2025). Recent work suggests that MoE mod-els offer a natural interpretability lens, as routing patterns often align with domain structures and experts exhibit emergent specialization. (Chaud-hari et al., 2025a,b; Li et al., 2026; Fayyaz et al., 2026). Moreover, combining MoE with sparsity has been shown to further improve monosemantic-ity (Yang et al., 2025). However, beyond Wang et al. (2024b) and Shen et al. (2025), MoE-based pref-erence modeling remains largely underexplored. Unlike token-level language modeling, it relies on pairwise comparisons and scalar supervision, pos-ing distinct challenges for learning interpretable and specialized experts. 

3 Sparse MoE Reward Model 

In this section, we introduce the sparse MoE re-ward model architecture and the interpretability regularization used during training. 

Preliminary In RLHF, a reward model 

rθ(x, y ) ∈ R estimates human preferences over responses y given a prompt x. Training data usually consists of pairwise comparisons 

D = {(x, y w, y l)}, where yw is preferred over yl.The reward model is typically implemented as a Bradley–Terry model (Bradley and Terry, 1952) which defines the preference probability as: 

P (yw ≻ yl | x) = σ rθ(x, y w) − rθ(x, y l), (1) where σ(z) = (1 + e−z )−1. The reward model is trained by minimizing the negative log-likelihood of observed preferences. 

MoE Reward Model Conventional models as-sume a single reward function underlying all pref-erences, which is insufficient for modeling hetero-geneous preferences. Therefore, inspired by Shen et al. (2025), we adopt an MoE architecture con-sisting of K experts {rθk }Kk=1 . A router πϕ(x) ∈

∆K−1 produces a softmax distribution over experts based on the input x, where πϕ,k (x) denotes the weight assigned to expert k. In practice, we im-plement experts as linear heads and the router as a one-hidden-layer MLP over backbone model rep-resentations. The final reward is computed as the weighted average of expert scores: 

r(x, y ) = 

> K

X

> k=1

πϕ,k (x) · rθk (x, y ). (2) Following Shen et al. (2025), we define the reward modeling loss by marginalizing the pairwise pref-erence probability over experts: 

LRM = − 1

|D| 

X 

> (x,y w,y l)∈D

log 

> K

X

> k=1

 πϕ,k (x)·

σ(rθk (x, y w) − rθk (x, y l)) .

(3) 

Interpretability Regularization In addition to the reward modeling loss, we introduce regulariza-tion terms to explicitly encourage interpretable and well-structured router behavior and emergence of expert specialization: 

(1) Local Sparsity : We encourage routers to out-put sparse weight distributions by minimizing the entropy of routing weights: 

Lls = Ex∼D 

" H πϕ(x)

log K

#

,H(π) = −

> K

X

> k=1

πk log πk.

(4) 3(2) Global Balance : To prevent model collapse, we encourage balanced utilization across experts by maximizing the entropy of the average routing distribution within a batch B:

Lgb = EB∼D 



− H(¯ πϕ)log K



, ¯πϕ = Ex∼B [πϕ(x)] .

(5) 

(3) Expert Diversity : We encourage experts to capture distinct preference signals by penalizing correlations between their reward differences. Let 

∆k = rθk (x, y w) − rθk (x, y l), and we minimize the average pairwise Pearson correlation: 

Ldiv = 2

K(K − 1) 

X

> i<j

corr(∆ i, ∆j )2, (6) where the Pearson correlations are computed over a batch B of preference pairs. The overall training objective is defined as: 

L = LRM + λls Lls + λgb Lgb + λdiv Ldiv , (7) where λls , λgb , and λdiv control the strengths of local sparsity, global balance, and expert diversity regularization, respectively. 

4 Experimental Setup 

Models Following Shen et al. (2025), we use a strong open-source reward model GRM-Llama3.2-3B (Yang et al., 2024) as the frozen backbone and train K linear heads as experts. The router is imple-mented as a one-hidden-layer MLP with 128 hid-den units. Unless otherwise specified, we set λls ,

λgb , and λdiv to 0.5, 0.5, and 2.0 throughout all ex-periments. The number of experts is set separately for each experiment according to the complexity of the target data. Details on data processing, evalu-ation metrics, training configurations, and experi-mental setups are provided in Appendix A. Appen-dices B and C provide ablations on the number of experts K and each regularization term, along with practical guidelines for selecting hyperparameters. 

Baselines We compare our sparse MoE reward model against a single-head reward model and two MoE baselines with the same architecture: vanilla MoE reward model and MiCRo (Shen et al., 2025). In contrast to our sparsity regularization, MiCRo encourages a more uniform routing distribution. 

5 Controlled Experiments 

We first evaluate sparse MoE in two controlled settings where the latent structure is known. Impor-tantly, we focus on two complementary aspects of MoE interpretability: routing pattern interpretabil-ity and expert specialization. Without interpretable routing patterns, expert behavior is difficult to characterize; without expert specialization, router-based interpretations derived from routing behavior may reflect only input assignment patterns rather than functional expert roles, making them less faith-ful and less useful for model adaptation. Finally, we test whether these properties enable effective steering through routing weight interventions. 

5.1 Category Recovery 

We first investigate whether sparse MoE can dis-cover latent semantic structure in the data without supervision. We use the Stanford Human Prefer-ences (SHP; Ethayarajh et al., 2022) dataset, which includes annotations of the prompt domains. As these domains vary in granularity, we group the 16 subsets into four broader categories, namely aca-demic , professional , cooking , and fiction .We train a sparse MoE reward model with K =5 experts on the dataset without using the domain annotations. Once the MoE model is trained, we assign each expert a category label based on the majority category among the 50 validation exam-ples that receive the highest routing weights for that expert. We then evaluate whether the router automatically learns to assign inputs according to category structure without supervision and whether the experts specialize in their assigned categories. 

Evaluation Setting In addition to accuracy, we report two model behavior metrics: average rout-ing entropy (Eq. 4) and average expert correlation (Eq. 6). Lower values indicate sparser routing and more distinct expert behavior, respectively, which are desirable for routing pattern interpretability and expert specialization. Since the latent categories are known in this experiment, we further evaluate interpretability and specialization directly using the following metrics adapted from prior work (Badjie et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025; Herbst et al., 2026): • Category Coverage : The proportion of cate-gories that are assigned to at least one expert. Higher scores indicate that the router better cap-tures the underlying category structure. • Expert Purity : For each expert, the proportion of its 50 top-activating test examples that belong to its assigned category. Higher scores indicate more coherent routing patterns. • Expert Specialization : For each expert, the dif-ference between its performance on its labeled 4Model Behavior Interpretability Method Accuracy ( ↑) Routing Entropy ( ↓) Expert Correlation ( ↓) Category Coverage ( ↑) Expert Purity ( ↑) Expert Specialization ( ↑)Single Reward 70.52 - - - - -Vanilla MoE 71.85 0.998 0.523 0.50 48.40 -0.51 MiCRo 71.70 1.000 0.527 0.50 51.60 0.08 Sparse MoE 69.62 0.200 0.011 1.00 85.60 5.77 

Table 1: Model behavior metrics and interpretability results on SHP. Sparse MoE reward model substantially outperforms baseline models in learning coherent and semantically meaningful routing patterns, while its experts exhibit clear behavioral specialization toward their assigned categories. 

category and the average performance of all ex-perts on the same category. Higher scores indi-cate stronger expert specialization in the router-assigned categories, and thus better alignment between routing patterns and expert behavior. 

Results Table 1 presents the results of our sparse MoE reward model on the SHP dataset. Compared to baselines, sparse MoE shows a slight decrease in overall performance (~2%) under the structural constraints imposed by interpretability regulariza-tion. In return, the resulting routing sparsity and expert diversity yield substantially stronger expert-level interpretability and specialization. First, sparse MoE is the only one that success-fully recovers all four categories, indicating that it automatically discovers semantically meaningful routing patterns aligned with the known category structure. By contrast, vanilla MoE and MiCRo recover only two categories because of their near-uniform routing, with routing entropy close to 1 and examples assigned almost equally across ex-perts. Moreover, sparse MoE exhibits highly co-herent and monosemantic routing behavior, with 85.60% of each expert’s top-activating examples coming from its assigned category. Finally, ex-perts in sparse MoE show diverse behavior and out-perform the average expert performance on their assigned categories by 5.77%, suggesting strong functional specialization. Appendix D provides the full results and more detailed analyses. 

Qualitative Analysis Table 2 presents represen-tative input prompts from SHP, together with their expert distributions produced by the sparse MoE router. We find that the router outputs highly sparse distributions, typically concentrating most proba-bility mass on a single expert. The dominant ex-perts are also consistent with the category labels identified above. Besides, when an input involves multiple semantic aspects, as in the last two exam-ples, the router also assigns non-negligible weight to a secondary expert, demonstrating that it can combine expertise for more accurate predictions. We further observe that sparse MoE discovers more fine-grained concepts than the coarse cate-gory labels. For example, among the two academic prompts, the science question is routed primarily to Expert 1, while the humanities question is routed mainly to Expert 0. This suggests that sparse MoE can capture nuanced semantic distinctions. 

Takeaway : Sparse MoE reward models learn se-mantically meaningful routing patterns and induce expert specialization. 

5.2 Attribute Steering 

We next examine whether the interpretable routing patterns and expert specialization are merely corre-lational, or whether they can be used to steer model behavior through intervention. To this end, we train reward models with preference attributes and steer them post hoc by adjusting routing weights. Specifically, we train MoE models on the Rea-sonable Preference Reversal (RPR; Pitis et al., 2024) dataset, in which each example contains two responses, each preferred under a different attribute (e.g., clarity vs. creativity). Given that RPR spans 40 diverse attributes, we train a model with K = 10 

experts. Following Shen et al. (2025), we append a user specification of the desired attribute to each prompt during training, allowing the model to learn attribute-conditioned preferences. At test time, we remove the attribute informa-tion and evaluate whether manipulating the routing weights can steer MoE models toward target pref-erence attributes. For each attribute, we select a target expert whose top 100 activating validation examples contain the highest proportion of that attribute. We then steer the model by setting the tar-get expert’s weight to w ∈ { 0.25 , 0.5, 0.75 , 1.0},and rescaling the remaining weights to preserve a normalized routing distribution. We also report a random baseline that randomly selects target ex-perts from the sparse MoE model. 

Evaluation Setting We evaluate steering effec-tiveness using the flip rate . For each attribute, we 5Input Prompt Category Expert 0 (Academic) Expert 1 (Academic) Expert 2 (Professional) Expert 3 (Cooking) Expert 4 (Fiction) Why is 18 the maximum amount of electrons an atomic shell can hold? Academic 0.025 0.967 0.000 0.007 0.000 Why is it that Eastern and Western philosophy don’t appear to have interacted much, even in the ancient world, until the 19th century? Is there any evidence of cross pollination of ideas? Academic 0.777 0.222 0.000 0.000 0.001 I own a condo and my downstairs neighbors have called police on me over 300 times in the last 365 days claiming frivolous noise complaints, HOA is now involved and threatening legal action. Can they force me out of my unit? No mortgage, bought in cash...I am sole occupant. (MN) Professional 0.000 0.000 0.989 0.000 0.011 A friend said I should crack my garlic 10 minutes before cooking, is there a real reason for this? She said that it causes some chemical reaction to make the garlic taste better, can I just cut the garlic up and wait 10 minutes or is this pointless to begin with? Cooking 0.000 0.123 0.000 0.877 0.000 [Marvel Comics] Why did Norse paganism fade away, when Thor was actually present on Earth, fighting monsters and performing miracles? Fiction 0.178 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.822 

Table 2: Input prompts from SHP together with the routing weights assigned to each expert. Parentheses under each expert indicate the category associated with that expert. The router produces sparse and semantically meaningful routing distributions based on the input semantics. 

first identify examples that are misclassified when the target expert is removed. The flip rate is then computed as the proportion of these examples that switch to the preferred response after assigning a specified weight to the target expert. Finally, we average the flip rates across all target weights and attributes to obtain an overall score. Random    

> Vanilla MoE
> MiCRo
> Sparse MoE
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> 45
> 50
> Flip rate (  )
> 34.73
> 29.46
> 39.31
> 43.83
> 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Target expert weight
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> Flip rate (  )
> Random
> Vanilla MoE
> MiCRo
> Sparse MoE

Figure 2: Attribute steering results on RPR. Sparse MoE achieves the strongest steering performance. The improvements are statistically significant ( α < 0.05 ). 

Results Figure 2 presents the average flip rate of each model (left) and the flip rate as a function of the target expert weight (right). Benefiting from improved interpretability and expert specialization, sparse MoE outperforms the strongest baseline by 4.52% in average flip rate. Specifically, behav-iorally distinct experts make routing weight inter-ventions more influential on model preferences, as reflected by the high flip rate of sparse MoE even under random expert steering. Moreover, the en-hanced interpretability helps identify suitable target experts and enables more targeted steering. No-tably, sparse MoE reaches a flip rate of over 60% with w = 1 .0, further highlighting its effectiveness. We additionally analyze undesired flips in Ap-pendix E and show that steering the target experts in sparse MoE does not increase unintended changes to originally correct predictions. These results fur-ther confirm the effectiveness and robustness of attribute steering in the sparse MoE model. 

Takeaway : Interpretable routing patterns and ex-pert specialization in sparse MoE reward models support targeted interventional control over model behavior by tuning routing weights. 

6 Real-World Binary Preference Data 

In this section, we evaluate the interpretability and personalization capability of sparse MoE reward models in a real-world setting using standard binary preference data. In particular, we train MoE models on the preference-700K dataset (700K; Dong et al., 2024) and use the dataset for expert interpretation as well. To capture diverse patterns in the real-world preference data, we use K = 20 experts and set λgb = 1 .0 to prevent routing collapse. 

6.1 Interpretability Evaluation 

Following prior work on automated feature inter-pretation (Shu et al., 2025), we interpret experts by summarizing their top-activating examples. Con-cretely, for each expert, we collect 20 validation ex-amples with the largest routing weights and prompt an LLM (Qwen3.6-27B) to summarize their shared features as a natural language description. This yields a router-based interpretation of each expert. Table 3 presents some examples of the descriptions. Results for the random baseline are computed by shuffling the examples while keeping the sparse MoE router weights fixed. 

Evaluation Setting As in the controlled experi-ments, we evaluate MoE interpretability from two complementary perspectives: whether routing pat-terns are interpretable, and whether these interpre-tations align with expert specialization. 6ID Natural Language Description Description Fidelity ( ↑) Expert Specialization ( ↑)0 asks for advice, feedback, or discussion on a personal, professional, or academic challenge 0.43 22.08 6 asks to solve a procedural task involving numerical or list manipulation 0.51 25.98 8 asks for a summary or extraction of information from a provided text 0.45 19.35 10 asks for a direct answer to a multiple-choice or short-answer question 0.36 20.56 13 requests assistance with illegal, harmful, or sexually explicit activities 0.62 3.35 15 asks to solve a competitive mathematics problem 0.42 32.00 

Table 3: Natural language descriptions of selected experts in the sparse MoE model. Most experts specialize in a particular task, topic, or input format. Descriptions of all experts are provided in Appendix D. 

For routing pattern interpretability, we measure 

description fidelity following Movva et al. (2026). For each expert, we sample 200 test examples and instruct an LLM (Qwen3.6-35B-A3B) to judge whether each example matches the expert’s nat-ural language description. We then compute the Pearson correlation between these binary relevance judgments and the corresponding router activations. A higher description fidelity score indicates that the model learns coherent and interpretable routing pat-terns that can be described in natural language. For expert specialization, we report the expert specialization score defined in Section 5.1. Since no ground truth clustering is available, we com-pute each expert’s accuracy on its top 10% highest-activating examples and compare it with the aver-age accuracy of all experts on the same examples. The resulting performance gap is reported as the specialization score. A higher expert specialization score indicates that the router-based interpretation faithfully reflects the expert’s functional role, rather than merely describing an assignment pattern. Method Accuracy ( ↑) Description Fidelity ( ↑) Expert Specialization ( ↑)Single Reward 83.52 - -Vanilla MoE 84.82 0.29 0.09 MiCRo 84.68 0.15 0.04 Random - 0.01 -0.04 Sparse MoE 83.78 0.38 15.13 

Table 4: Interpretability results on 700K. Sparse MoE exhibits the most interpretable routing patterns, which are also consistent with its expert specialization. 

Results Table 4 shows that our sparse MoE model achieves substantially better interpretability than baselines, while maintaining competitive pre-dictive accuracy. It obtains the highest description fidelity, indicating that the routing patterns are co-herent and interpretable. It also achieves a consid-erably higher expert specialization score, showing that the experts perform better on examples match-ing their natural language descriptions. By contrast, vanilla MoE and MiCRo exhibit near-random ex-pert specialization. Together, these results suggest that sparse MoE learns interpretable and function-ally specialized experts whose strengths align with the routing patterns. Examples in Table 3 further show that inputs are grouped by highly human-interpretable features, such as topics or tasks. 

Human Evaluation We additionally conduct a human study to compare expert interpretation qual-ity across models. For each model, we sample 5 experts and present their 10 highest-activating examples to 5 annotators. Annotators first rate whether the examples exhibit coherent patterns (pattern coherence ), and then rate how well the LLM-generated description captures the shared pat-tern ( description quality ), both on a 1–5 scale. Ad-ditional details are provided in Appendix F. Pattern Coherence Description Quality 

> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> Rating (  ) 2.80
> 3.60
> 2.96
> 3.88
> 3.24
> 3.72
> 3.88
> 4.16
> Random
> Vanilla MoE
> MiCRo
> Sparse MoE

Figure 3: Human evaluation of model interpretability. 

Human annotators find that sparse MoE has the most interpretable routing patterns. The improvements in pat-tern coherence are statistically significant ( α < 0.05 ). 

Figure 3 further shows that the sparse MoE model is more interpretable than baselines. This im-provement mainly stems from the ability of sparse MoE to route inputs based on more coherent pat-terns (i.e., higher pattern coherence score), as a result of our explicit interpretability regularization. It also facilitates the generation of better natural language descriptions of the experts by LLMs. 

Takeaway : Sparse MoE reward models learn in-terpretable and specialized experts on real-world preference data as well. 

6.2 Personalization Evaluation 

We conjecture that the disentangled experts in sparse MoE models support effective and inter-pretable personalization. To evaluate this, we 7Method Linguistic Creativity User Friendliness Humor & Entertainment Scientific Rigor Narrative & Storytelling Creativity & Originality Factual Accuracy Overall Single Reward 31.73 39.33 30.16 76.19 34.17 18.52 85.92 45.15 HyRe 37.50 (+6.73) 46.44 (+9.36) 32.14 (+3.57) 78.17 (+0.79) 40.0 (+7.50) 31.02 (+14.35) 81.22 (-0.47) 49.5 (+5.98) Vanilla MoE 42.31 (+11.54) 44.19 (+8.23) 36.51 (+6.75) 81.74 (+3.17) 51.67 (+19.17) 28.70 (+10.64) 89.20 (+7.51) 53.47 (+9.57) MiCRo 40.39 (+9.62) 42.32 (+6.36) 40.48 (+10.72) 81.35 (+2.78) 51.25 (+18.75) 28.24 (+10.18) 88.73 (+7.04) 53.25 (+9.35) Sparse MoE 74.04 (+43.27) 55.06 (+14.61) 80.56 (+50.80) 82.54 (+7.54) 68.75 (+28.75) 60.19 (+31.02) 83.57 (+4.70) 72.1 (+25.81) 

Table 5: Personalization results on RPR. Scores in parentheses denote the change after adaptation. Higher scores are better. Sparse MoE demonstrates the strongest personalization performance among all compared models. 

conduct test-time personalization experiments by adapting the routers of MoE models to new at-tributes or users using only a small adaptation set. 

Evaluation Setting Following Luo et al. (2025), we use RPR for attribute-level personalization. For each attribute, we use n = 50 training examples for adaptation and evaluate on all test examples (see Appendix G for results under different adaptation set sizes). During adaptation, we freeze the experts of MoE models trained on 700K and fine-tune the router using the Hedge algorithm proposed by Shen et al. (2025). As an additional baseline, we include HyRe (Lee et al., 2024), an ensemble method that trains 20 reward models and reweights them at test time. Unlike MoE models, HyRe uses input-independent ensemble weights. We report post-adaptation performance and improvements over the corresponding non-adapted models, averaged over three independently sampled adaptation sets. 

Results Table 5 presents the attribute-level per-sonalization results on RPR. Our sparse MoE re-ward model achieves the strongest performance in modeling target attributes, improving overall accu-racy by 25.81 points, while no other model achieves an improvement greater than 10. The gains are es-pecially large when the original model performs poorly under the target attribute, suggesting that sparse MoE can effectively adapt to preferences that substantially deviate from universal preference patterns. Results for all tested attributes are pro-vided in Appendix D. For completeness, we evaluate user-level adap-tation on PersonalLLM (Zollo et al., 2025), where sparse MoE outperforms baseline models in adapt-ing to individualized preferences as well (Ap-pendix H). We also conduct a post-training exper-iment with the adapted reward models and show that they can effectively guide model alignment toward personalized values (Appendix I). 

Inspecting Preference Adaptation Leveraging the interpretability and specialization of experts in sparse MoE, we further analyze the model’s adaptation to individual preferences by examining changes in expert weights after adaptation. Table 6 reports, for a subset of attributes, the expert whose weight increases the most after adaptation. We observe that the upweighted experts often show plausible semantic associations with the target at-tributes. Overall, post-adaptation expert weight shifts provide a useful diagnostic signal for inspect-ing preference adaptation. Attribute Most Upweighted Expert Factual Accuracy asks for a summary or extraction of information from a provided text Pedagogical Effectiveness asks for advice, feedback, or discus-sion on a personal, professional, or academic challenge Innovativeness asks a question containing a fac-tual error, logical fallacy, or absurd premise 

Table 6: Experts most strongly upweighted after adaptation for selected attributes. The experts align semantically with the adapted attributes in an inter-pretable way. 

Takeaway : The interpretable and specialized ex-perts in sparse MoE reward models facilitate effec-tive test-time personalization and provide insight into how models adapt to individual preferences. 

7 Conclusion 

In this work, we address the challenge of person-alized preference modeling by proposing a sparse MoE reward model, which encourages sparse rout-ing and expert diversity during training on binary preference data. Experiments in both controlled and real-world settings demonstrate that sparse MoE reward models learn interpretable and special-ized experts. These disentangled experts also sup-port effective test-time personalization in low-data settings, and their post-adaptation weight shifts offer a qualitative way to inspect how the model adjusts to individual preferences. 8Limitations 

Our study has certain limitations that should be acknowledged. First, although we demonstrate im-proved interpretability and personalization capabil-ity in sparse MoE reward models, effective training still depends on the selection of multiple hyperpa-rameters. This could introduce additional complex-ity and tuning effort in practice. To mitigate this issue, we provide detailed ablation studies on the effect of the number of experts and each regular-ization term in Appendix B and Appendix C, and offer practical guidelines for hyperparameter selec-tion. Second, as our method is largely data-driven, the learned expert patterns are inherently depen-dent on the latent structure of the training data and are difficult to predict beforehand. As a result, the emergence of specific patterns or expert behavior of interest is usually not guaranteed. Finally, the in-terpretability and personalization benefits of sparse MoE models come with a minor drop in univer-sal preference modeling performance. Therefore, they may be less suitable for settings where accu-rately capturing global preferences is the primary objective. 

Ethics Statement 

While our work aims to address the challenge of modeling heterogeneous human values, the pro-posed models also introduce potential risks of dual use, as they can be adapted to pverfit to individual preferences. As a result, universal principles such as fairness and safety constraints could potentially be bypassed, and harmful behaviors or addictive usage patterns may be reinforced. In addition, our framework makes certain preference patterns more interpretable, which may increase the risk of pri-vacy leakage or misuse of sensitive user informa-tion. Therefore, we strongly recommend that any real-world deployment of such systems undergo careful ethical review and oversight by appropriate ethics committees. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was funded by the DFG project GRK 2853 "Neuroexplicit Models of Language, Vision, and Action" (project number 471607914). 

References 

Bakary Badjie, José Cecílio, and António Casimiro. 2025. Double-stage feature-level clustering-based mixture of experts framework. CoRR ,abs/2503.09504. Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Tristan Hume, and 12 others. 2022. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. CoRR , abs/2204.05862. Nishant Balepur, Vishakh Padmakumar, Fumeng Yang, Shi Feng, Rachel Rudinger, and Jordan Lee Boyd-Graber. 2025. Whose boat does it float? improving personalization in preference tuning via inferred user personas. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3371–3393, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ B. Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx, Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson, Shya-mal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Ni-ladri S. Chatterji, Annie S. Chen, Kathleen Creel, Jared Quincy Davis, Dorottya Demszky, and 34 oth-ers. 2021. On the opportunities and risks of founda-tion models. CoRR , abs/2108.07258. Avinandan Bose, Zhihan Xiong, Yuejie Chi, Si-mon Shaolei Du, Lin Xiao, and Maryam Fazel. 2025. Lore: Personalizing LLMs via low-rank reward mod-eling. In Second Conference on Language Modeling .Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. 1952. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method of paired comparisons. Biometrika , 39(3/4):324– 345. Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Conerly, Nick Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, Robert Lasenby, Yifan Wu, Shauna Kravec, Nicholas Schiefer, Tim Maxwell, Nicholas Joseph, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Alex Tamkin, Karina Nguyen, and 6 others. 2023. Towards monosemanticity: Decompos-ing language models with dictionary learning. Trans-former Circuits Thread .Weilin Cai, Juyong Jiang, Fan Wang, Jing Tang, Sunghun Kim, and Jiayi Huang. 2025. A survey on mixture of experts in large language models. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering ,37(7):3896–3915. Souradip Chakraborty, Jiahao Qiu, Hui Yuan, Alec Kop-pel, Dinesh Manocha, Furong Huang, Amrit Bedi, and Mengdi Wang. 2024. MaxMin-RLHF: Align-ment with diverse human preferences. In Proceed-ings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 6116–6135. PMLR. 

9Marmik Chaudhari, Idhant Gulati, Nishkal Hundia, Pranav Karra, and Shivam Raval. 2025a. Moe lens - an expert is all you need. In Sparsity in LLMs (SLLM): Deep Dive into Mixture of Experts, Quanti-zation, Hardware, and Inference .Marmik Chaudhari, Jeremi Nuer, and Rome Thorsten-son. 2025b. Superposition in mixture of experts. In 

Mechanistic Interpretability Workshop at NeurIPS 2025 .Daiwei Chen, Yi Chen, Aniket Rege, Zhi Wang, and Ramya Korlakai Vinayak. 2025. PAL: Sample-efficient personalized reward modeling for pluralistic alignment. In The Thirteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Keertana Chidambaram, Karthik Vinay Seetharaman, and Vasilis Syrgkanis. 2026. Direct preference opti-mization with unobserved preference heterogeneity: The necessity of ternary preferences. In The 29th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics .Youngbin Choi, Seunghyuk Cho, Minjong Lee, Moon-Jeong Park, Yesong Ko, Jungseul Ok, and Dongwoo Kim. 2025. CoPL: Collaborative preference learn-ing for personalizing LLMs. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 12875–12893, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Bo Pang, Haoxiang Wang, Han Zhao, Yingbo Zhou, Nan Jiang, Doyen Sahoo, Caiming Xiong, and Tong Zhang. 2024. RLHF work-flow: From reward modeling to online RLHF. Trans-actions on Machine Learning Research .Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse, Sam McCandlish, Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. 2022. Toy models of superpo-sition. Transformer Circuits Thread .Kawin Ethayarajh, Yejin Choi, and Swabha Swayamdipta. 2022. Understanding dataset difficulty with V-usable information. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 5988–6008. PMLR. Mohsen Fayyaz, Ali Modarressi, Hanieh Deilamsalehy, Franck Dernoncourt, Ryan A. Rossi, Trung Bui, Hin-rich Schuetze, and Nanyun Peng. 2026. Steering moe LLMs via expert (de)activation. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Jeremy Herbst, Jae Hee Lee, and Stefan Wermter. 2026. The expert strikes back: Interpreting mixture-of-experts language models at expert level. CoRR ,abs/2604.02178. Adam Karvonen, Can Rager, Johnny Lin, Curt Tigges, Joseph Isaac Bloom, David Chanin, Yeu-Tong Lau, Eoin Farrell, Callum Stuart McDougall, Kola Ay-onrinde, Demian Till, Matthew Wearden, Arthur Conmy, Samuel Marks, and Neel Nanda. 2025. SAEBench: A comprehensive benchmark for sparse autoencoders in language model interpretability. In 

Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning .Timo Kaufmann, Paul Weng, Viktor Bengs, and Eyke Hüllermeier. 2025. A survey of reinforcement learn-ing from human feedback. Transactions on Machine Learning Research . Survey Certification. Yoonho Lee, Jonathan Williams, Henrik Marklund, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Anikait Singh, and Chelsea Finn. 2024. Test-time alignment via hypoth-esis reweighting. CoRR , abs/2412.08812. Shuyue Stella Li, Melanie Sclar, Hunter Lang, An-song Ni, Jacqueline He, Puxin Xu, Andrew Cohen, Chan Young Park, Yulia Tsvetkov, and Asli Celiky-ilmaz. 2025. Prefpalette: Personalized preference modeling with latent attributes. In Second Confer-ence on Language Modeling .Wengang Li, Lingqi Zhang, Toshio Endo, and Mohamed Wahib. 2026. Understanding cross-layer contribu-tions to mixture-of-experts routing in LLMs. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Dengcan Liu, Jiahao Li, Zheren Fu, Yi Tu, Jiajun Li, Zhendong Mao, and Yongdong Zhang. 2026. Sparserm: A lightweight preference modeling with sparse autoencoder. Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-ence on Artificial Intelligence , 40(38):32051–32059. Jiongnan Liu, Yutao Zhu, Shuting Wang, Xiaochi Wei, Erxue Min, Yu Lu, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, and Zhicheng Dou. 2025. LLMs + persona-plug = per-sonalized LLMs. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 9373–9385, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Feng Luo, Rui Yang, Hao Sun, Chunyuan Deng, Jiarui Yao, Jingyan Shen, Huan Zhang, and Hanjie Chen. 2025. Rethinking diverse human preference learning through principal component analysis. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 19857–19870, Vienna, Austria. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Rajiv Movva, Smitha Milli, Sewon Min, and Emma Pierson. 2026. What’s in my human feedback? learn-ing interpretable descriptions of preference data. In 

The Fourteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 technical report. CoRR ,abs/2303.08774. 

10 Silviu Pitis, Ziang Xiao, Nicolas Le Roux, and Alessan-dro Sordoni. 2024. Improving context-aware prefer-ence modeling for language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 70793–70827. Curran Associates, Inc. Sriyash Poddar, Yanming Wan, Hamish Ivison, Ab-hishek Gupta, and Natasha Jaques. 2024. Person-alizing reinforcement learning from human feedback with variational preference learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 52516–52544. Curran Associates, Inc. Shanghaoran Quan. 2024. DMoERM: Recipes of mixture-of-experts for effective reward modeling. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: ACL 2024 , pages 7006–7028, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Michael J. Ryan, Omar Shaikh, Aditri Bhagirath, Daniel Frees, William Held, and Diyi Yang. 2025. Synthe-sizeMe! inducing persona-guided prompts for per-sonalized reward models in LLMs. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 8045–8078, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. CoRR , abs/2402.03300. Noam Shazeer, *Azalia Mirhoseini, *Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton, and Jeff Dean. 2017. Outrageously large neural net-works: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Jingyan Shen, Jiarui Yao, Rui Yang, Yifan Sun, Feng Luo, Rui Pan, Tong Zhang, and Han Zhao. 2025. Mi-CRo: Mixture modeling and context-aware routing for personalized preference learning. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 17447–17463, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Dong Shu, Xuansheng Wu, Haiyan Zhao, Daking Rai, Ziyu Yao, Ninghao Liu, and Mengnan Du. 2025. A survey on sparse autoencoders: Interpreting the internal mechanisms of large language models. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 1690–1712, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Anand Siththaranjan, Cassidy Laidlaw, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. 2024. Distributional preference learning: Understanding and accounting for hidden context in RLHF. In The Twelfth International Con-ference on Learning Representations .Adly Templeton, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus, Jack Lindsey, Trenton Bricken, Brian Chen, Adam Pearce, Craig Citro, Emmanuel Ameisen, Andy Jones, Hoagy Cunningham, Nicholas L Turner, Callum McDougall, Monte MacDiarmid, C. Daniel Freeman, Theodore R. Sumers, Edward Rees, Joshua Batson, Adam Jermyn, and 3 others. 2024. Scaling monosemanticity: Ex-tracting interpretable features from claude 3 sonnet. 

Transformer Circuits Thread .Haoxiang Wang, Yong Lin, Wei Xiong, Rui Yang, Shizhe Diao, Shuang Qiu, Han Zhao, and Tong Zhang. 2024a. Arithmetic control of LLMs for di-verse user preferences: Directional preference align-ment with multi-objective rewards. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 8642–8655, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Haoxiang Wang, Wei Xiong, Tengyang Xie, Han Zhao, and Tong Zhang. 2024b. Interpretable preferences via multi-objective reward modeling and mixture-of-experts. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 10582– 10592, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Xiaobao Wu. 2025. A comprehensive survey on learn-ing from rewards for large language models: Reward models and learning strategies. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 17847–17875, Suzhou, China. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Xinle Wu and Yao Lu. 2026. Reward model routing in alignment. In The Fourteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Zeqiu Wu, Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Nouha Dziri, Alane Suhr, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Noah A. Smith, Mari Ostendorf, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. Fine-grained human feedback gives better rewards for lan-guage model training. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Rui Yang, Ruomeng Ding, Yong Lin, Huan Zhang, and Tong Zhang. 2024. Regularizing hidden states en-ables learning generalizable reward model for llms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems .Xingyi Yang, Constantin Venhoff, Ashkan Khakzar, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Puneet K. Dokania, Adel Bibi, and Philip Torr. 2025. Mixture of experts made intrinsically interpretable. In Forty-second In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning .Rui Yu, Shenghua Wan, Yucen Wang, Chen-Xiao Gao, Le Gan, Zongzhang Zhang, and De-Chuan Zhan. 2025. Reward models in deep reinforcement learn-ing: A survey. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence, IJCAI-25 , pages 10807–10816. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organi-zation. Survey Track. 

11 Michael JQ Zhang, Zhilin Wang, Jena D. Hwang, Yi Dong, Olivier Delalleau, Yejin Choi, Eunsol Choi, Xiang Ren, and Valentina Pyatkin. 2025. Diverging preferences: When do annotators disagree and do models know? In Forty-second International Confer-ence on Machine Learning .Shuyi Zhang, Wei Shi, Sihang Li, Jiayi Liao, Tao Liang, Hengxing Cai, and Xiang Wang. 2026. Interpretable reward model via sparse autoencoder. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,40(41):34808–34816. Siyan Zhao, John Dang, and Aditya Grover. 2024. Group preference optimization: Few-shot alignment of large language models. In The Twelfth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Zhanhui Zhou, Jie Liu, Jing Shao, Xiangyu Yue, Chao Yang, Wanli Ouyang, and Yu Qiao. 2024. Beyond one-preference-fits-all alignment: Multi-objective di-rect preference optimization. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 ,pages 10586–10613, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul F. Chris-tiano, and Geoffrey Irving. 2019. Fine-tuning lan-guage models from human preferences. CoRR ,abs/1909.08593. Thomas P Zollo, Andrew Wei Tung Siah, Naimeng Ye, Ang Li, and Hongseok Namkoong. 2025. Personal-LLM: Tailoring LLMs to individual preferences. In 

> The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .

A Details on Experimental Setup 

SHP The SHP dataset is curated from Reddit posts and contains 18 subsets featuring different domains. Following the recommended practice from the dataset curator, we use only examples where both chosen and rejected responses receive more than 3 likes. For training and evaluation, we exclude the explainlikeimfive and changemyview 

subsets, as their examples contain special prefixes that can easily leak the domain information. For ex-amples replying to the same input, we only sample one pair of responses for evaluation. In the end, we use 36000/4000/1497 examples for train/val/test sets, respectively. The domains, their groupings, and numbers in the test set can be found in Table 7. 

RPR Since each example in RPR is paired with two attributes, under which the preference is swapped, we convert each example to two attribute-conditioned examples with context during training. Specifically, following Shen et al. (2025), we ap-pend the criteria corresponding to target attributes to the inputs and assign labels accordingly. We use the complete training set with all 40 attributes for reward model training, resulting in 18300/2034 train/validation examples. Some examples of at-tributes and their corresponding context-dependent criteria are provided below: • Linguistic Creativity: The response should demonstrate linguistic creativity by incorpo-rating poetry or quotations attributed to the Sufi figure, enhancing the cultural and emo-tional understanding of their teachings. • Detail and Elaboration: Provides a detailed step-by-step guide on how to build the app. • Clarity and Conciseness: Provides a precise and succinct explanation of the bug, focusing on its technical aspects and why it violates design guidelines. For evaluation robustness, we conduct attribute steering and personalization experiments on the 17 attributes that appear over 50 times in the test set. These attributes are: Linguistic Creativity, User Friendliness, Humor and Entertainment Value, Sci-entific Rigor, Narrative and Storytelling Quality, Creativity and Originality, Factual Accuracy, Inno-vativeness, Pedagogical Effectiveness, Economic Feasibility, Technical Complexity, Interdisciplinary Approach, Empathy and Emotional Intelligence, Contextual Relevance, Clarity and Conciseness, User Experience, Practical Application .We perform paired t-tests on flip rates across all tested attributes to assess the statistical significance of the improvements. 

700K We randomly sample 36000/4000/5000 ex-amples to create the train/validation/test sets for 700K. 

License We use publicly available datasets and models for research purposes and cite the original sources. SHP is derived from Reddit data under the Reddit API Terms of Use and does not provide a standard open-source license. RPR is released un-der CDLA-Permissive-2.0. For preference-700K, we could not identify an explicit license on the dataset card; therefore, we report the license of the official accompanying RLHF Workflow repos-itory, which is released under Apache-2.0. For PersonalLLM, although the Hugging Face meta-data lists CC BY 4.0, the paper states that the 12 Category Domain # Examples in the Test Set Academic askphysics, askscience, askengineers, askhistorians, askphilosophy, asksocialscience, askanthropology 617 Professional askdocs, askvet, askhr, legaladvice, askacademia, askcarguys 384 Cooking askbaking, askculinary 256 Fiction asksciencefiction 240 

Table 7: Domain composition and number of test examples for each category in SHP. 

dataset is released under CC BY-NC 4.0; we there-fore conservatively treat it as non-commercial re-search data. The GRM-Llama3.2-3B reward model and Qwen3.6 models used for expert interpretation and evaluation are released under Apache-2.0. We do not redistribute the original datasets or model weights. 

Training Details For a fair comparison, we use the same training configuration for all models and baselines. We set the learning rate to 0.002/0.0005 for experts and router parameters, respectively, with a default AdamW optimizer and 5% warmup steps. A dropout rate of 0.2 and jitter noise of 0.25 are applied to the router in MoE models to avoid routing collapse. We train the models for 3 epochs with a batch size of 16 on one H100 GPU, as we find sufficiently long training is necessary for MoE to develop rea-sonable specialization. 

Evaluation Metrics We provide mathematical descriptions of the evaluation metrics we used in the experiments. • Category Coverage Let C denote the set of ground truth categories. For each expert k, we assign a category label ˆck based on the majority category among its top-activating validation exam-ples. Category coverage is defined as: 

Coverage = |{ c ∈ C : ∃k, ˆck = c}| |C| . (8) • Expert Purity Let ℓ(x) ∈ C denote the ground truth category of input x. For each expert k, let 

T (n) 

> k

be the set of n test examples with the largest routing weights πϕ,k (x). Given the category label 

ˆck assigned to expert k, expert purity is defined as: 

Purity k = 1

|T (n) 

> k

|

X 

> x∈T (n)
> k

1{ℓ(x) = ˆ ck}. (9) The overall expert purity score is averaged across experts: 

Purity = 1

K

> K

X

> k=1

Purity k. (10) • Expert Specialization Let Dc denote the set of test examples belonging to category c, and let 

Acc j (c) denote the accuracy of expert j on Dc. For each expert k with assigned category ˆck, we define its specialization score as the difference between its accuracy on ˆck and the average accuracy of all experts on the same category: 

Spec k = Acc k(ˆ ck) − 1

K

> K

X

> j=1

Acc j (ˆ ck). (11) In settings without ground truth categories, we instead evaluate specialization on the examples most strongly associated with each expert. For each expert k, let T (m%)  

> k

denote the top m% test examples with the largest routing weights πϕ,k (x).Let Acc j (S) denote the accuracy of expert j on a set of examples S. We define the specialization score of expert k as: 

Spec k = Acc k(T (m%)  

> k

) − 1

K

> K

X

> j=1

Acc j (T (m%)  

> k

).

(12) The overall expert specialization score is aver-aged across experts: 

Spec = 1

K

> K

X

> k=1

Spec k. (13) • Flip Rate Let A denote the set of evaluated attributes and W denote the set of target expert weights. For each attribute a ∈ A , let Da be its test set and let ka be the target expert selected for this attribute. Given a target weight w ∈ W , we define the intervened routing distribution ˜π(ka,w ) 

> ϕ

(x) by setting the weight of expert ka to w and rescaling the remaining expert weights to sum to 1 − w.Let ˆy(ka,w )(x) denote the response selected by the model under this intervention, and let y+ 

> a

(x)

denote the response preferred under attribute a. We first identify the examples that are misclassified when the target expert is removed: 

Ma =

n

x ∈ D a : ˆ y(ka,0) (x)̸ = y+ 

> a

(x)

o

. (14) 13 The flip rate for attribute a under target expert weight w is: 

FR( a, w ) = 

P 

> x∈M a

1 ˆy(ka,w )(x) = y+ 

> a

(x)

|M a| .

(15) The overall flip rate is averaged over all evalu-ated attributes and target expert weights: 

FR = 1

|A| |W| 

X

> a∈A

X

> w∈W

FR( a, w ). (16) • Undesired Flip Rate For each attribute a, we define the set of initially correct examples under target expert removal as: 

Ca =

n

x ∈ D a : ˆ y(ka,0) (x) = y+ 

> a

(x)

o

. (17) The undesired flip rate under target weight w is then: 

UFR( a, w ) = 

P 

> x∈C a

1 ˆy(ka,w )(x)̸ = y+ 

> a

(x)

|C a| .

(18) • Description Fidelity For each expert k, let dk de-note its natural language description, and let Sk be the set of sampled test examples used for evaluation. For each example x ∈ S k, we ask an LLM to judge whether x matches dk, producing a binary rele-vance judgment zk(x) ∈ { 0, 1}. We then compute the Pearson correlation between these judgments and the corresponding router activations πϕ,k (x):

DF k = corr x∈S k (zk(x), π ϕ,k (x)) . (19) The overall description fidelity score is averaged across experts: 

DF = 1

K

> K

X

> k=1

DF k. (20) 

Expert Interpretation When computing the de-scription fidelity of expert interpretations, since only a small fraction of examples strongly activate any given expert, we stratify the sample by drawing 100 examples from the top 10% of activations and 100 examples from the remaining 90%. The prompts that we use for interpreting ex-perts and evaluating interpretability are adapted from Movva et al. (2026) and are provided in Fig-ure 4 and Figure 5. 

Test-Time Personalization We use the test-time weight adjustment method from Lee et al. (2024) for HyRe and implement the Hedge algorithm from Shen et al. (2025) for fine-tuning routers in MoE models. For Hedge, we use τ = 0 .001 , fol-lowing the recommendation of the original paper. All models are trained for 10 epochs using a batch size of 32 and a learning rate of 0.01 for adaptation. 

B Effect of the Number of Experts 

We study the effect of the number of experts by training sparse MoE models with K ∈{10 , 20 , 30 , 40 , 50 } on 700K and evaluating their interpretability. We conduct this analysis on the real-world dataset rather than the controlled set-tings, because the pre-defined labels in the con-trolled experiments capture only coarse latent struc-tures and may not fully reflect the finer-grained patterns discovered by the model. Figure 6 shows how description fidelity and ex-pert specialization change with the number of ex-perts. Description fidelity increases from K = 10 

to K = 30 , where it reaches its peak, and then remains relatively stable. This suggests that in-creasing the number of experts initially helps the router discover more semantically coherent input clusters, but adding experts beyond this point pro-vides limited additional benefit. We interpret this peak as reflecting the effective granularity of input patterns that can be reliably supported by the data, training objective, and interpretation procedure. By contrast, expert specialization decreases steadily as K increases. This suggests that larger expert counts may fragment the preference learning signal and weaken the behavioral specialization of individual expert heads. Together, these trends in-dicate a trade-off between semantic interpretability and functional specialization: router assignments can remain semantically interpretable at larger K,while the corresponding expert heads become less behaviorally specialized. 

C Ablation Study of Interpretability Regularization 

To better understand the effect of each interpretabil-ity regularization term on model behavior, we conduct a comprehensive ablation study using a grid search over λls ∈ [0 .0, 0.5, 1.0] , λgb ∈

[0 .0, 0.5, 1.0] , and λdiv ∈ [0 .0, 1.0, 2.0] on SHP with K = 5 experts. The resulting task perfor-mance, routing pattern, expert behavior, and inter-14 pretability metrics are reported in Table 8. For ease of visualization, we highlight in bold 

the models that do not suffer from collapse. These models exhibit low local entropy and high global entropy, indicating that the MoE does not rely on a single expert nor distribute inputs uniformly across experts. We observe that the interaction between 

λls and λgb largely determines whether the trained MoE model collapses. These two hyperparame-ters influence routing patterns in the intended man-ner: when the model uniformly utilizes all experts (i.e., high local and global entropy), increasing λls 

encourages more confident routing decisions; con-versely, when the model collapses to a single expert (i.e., low local and global entropy), increasing λgb 

encourages the model to utilize a broader set of experts. While λls and λgb primarily control router behav-ior, λdiv directly affects model interpretability and expert specialization. Increasing λdiv encourages more diverse expert outputs, leading to stronger expert specialization. At the same time, it imposes additional pressure on the router to distribute ex-amples in a more semantically meaningful manner, resulting in higher expert purity. Overall, although our method introduces three regularization terms and corresponding hyperpa-rameters, the ablation study shows that they serve distinct roles, allowing users to tune them based on the observed model behavior. In practice, we recommend starting with smaller and similar val-ues for λls and λgb to ensure stable training, and selecting λdiv according to the desired degree of interpretability. 

D Full Results 

Category Recovery Results Table 9 and Ta-ble 10 present the overall performance of our sparse MoE model on SHP, together with the accuracy and routing weights of each expert. We observe that the global entropy within each category is lower than that on the full dataset, indicating semanti-cally reasonable routing patterns at the category level. Examining the expert distributions further, we find that most categories assign more than 50% of their routing weight to a single expert. Moreover, these dominant experts typically achieve strong performance within their corresponding categories. Together, these results suggest that the sparse MoE reward model learns meaningful routing patterns and behaviorally specialized experts. We further analyze the performance drop of the sparse MoE reward model compared to the single-head baseline. The largest degradation occurs in the academic and professional categories, where the best-performing experts do not receive the highest routing weights. We therefore attribute the accu-racy drop of sparse MoE mainly to a mismatch between routing weights and expert abilities. This mismatch likely arises because these two categories are broad and heterogeneous, making it more diffi-cult for the router to assign examples to the most suitable experts. 

Expert Descriptions Table 11 presents the natu-ral language descriptions of all experts in the sparse MoE model trained on 700K examples. Most ex-perts specialize in a concrete type of question or task, exhibiting high description fidelity, while the corresponding experts also specialize behaviorally in the assigned examples. Despite nuanced differ-ences between experts, many focus on recurring categories such as feedback-seeking, safety-related queries, mathematics, code generation, and ques-tion answering. These expert patterns partially re-flect the underlying structure and distribution of the training data. We also observe that experts with similar activa-tion patterns, measured by high correlations in their activations across examples, tend to receive simi-lar interpretations. For instance, expert 4 exhibits strong activation correlations with expert 7 (0.95) and expert 16 (0.93), and all three are identified as advice-seeking experts. Similarly, safety-related experts also display highly aligned activation pat-terns, as illustrated by the 0.96 correlation between experts 5 and 18. These findings suggest the potential for hierar-chical expert interpretation and for reducing expert redundancy through additional regularization on router activation correlations, which we leave for future work. 

Personalization Results Test-time adaptation re-sults for all attributes on RPR in Table 12 further demonstrate the strong personalization capability of the sparse MoE reward model, consistent with the findings in Table 5. Our model achieves both the largest improvements over the non-adapted model and the best post-adaptation performance after adapting to individual preferences using only a small set of examples at test time. 15 λls λgb λdiv Accuracy ( ↑) Routing Entropy ( ↓) Global Entropy ( ↑) Expert Correlation ( ↓) Expert Purity ( ↑) Expert Specialization ( ↑)0.00 0.00 0.00 70.67 0.991 0.993 0.556 74.40 -1.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 70.70 0.133 0.139 0.024 80.00 1.12 0.00 0.00 2.00 71.10 0.014 0.015 0.003 70.00 0.47 0.00 0.50 0.00 71.17 1.000 1.000 0.493 43.20 -0.27 0.00 0.50 1.00 71.54 1.000 1.000 0.141 46.40 0.62 0.00 0.50 2.00 71.49 1.000 1.000 0.126 49.20 -0.07 0.00 1.00 0.00 71.24 1.000 1.000 0.520 56.80 -0.20 0.00 1.00 1.00 70.79 1.000 1.000 0.153 47.60 -0.91 0.00 1.00 2.00 71.92 1.000 1.000 0.110 47.20 0.84 0.50 0.00 0.00 70.24 0.000 0.000 0.743 54.80 -0.57 0.50 0.00 1.00 71.44 0.000 0.000 -0.028 46.80 -0.71 0.50 0.00 2.00 71.19 0.000 0.000 -0.027 44.00 -0.93                                                                                                                         

> 0.50 0.50 0.00 71.39 0.087 0.984 0.782 43.20 0.06 0.50 0.50 1.00 68.55 0.131 0.983 0.016 75.20 4.66 0.50 0.50 2.00 69.62 0.200 0.986 0.011 85.60 5.77 0.50 1.00 0.00 71.40 0.084 0.989 0.746 46.80 0.34 0.50 1.00 1.00 66.96 0.293 0.960 0.067 54.00 4.12 0.50 1.00 2.00 69.45 0.333 0.917 0.033 67.20 3.34
> 1.00 0.00 0.00 70.52 0.000 0.000 0.673 46.40 -0.69 1.00 0.00 1.00 70.64 0.000 0.000 -0.026 54.00 -1.23 1.00 0.00 2.00 70.76 0.000 0.000 0.006 34.00 -0.76
> 1.00 0.50 0.00 70.31 0.214 0.909 0.783 49.60 -0.06
> 1.00 0.50 1.00 70.05 0.142 0.148 0.044 80.40 1.10 1.00 0.50 2.00 70.54 0.161 0.166 0.007 92.00 1.35
> 1.00 1.00 0.00 71.17 0.083 0.983 0.746 47.20 0.38 1.00 1.00 1.00 69.31 0.088 0.987 0.072 47.20 3.71 1.00 1.00 2.00 66.15 0.104 0.997 0.009 54.80 3.98

Table 8: Ablation study of interpretability regularization terms on SHP. Models that do not suffer from collapse are marked in bold . λls and λgb mainly determine whether the MoE model collapses, while λdiv affects model interpretability and expert specialization. 

Domain # Examples Accuracy ( ↑) Routing Entropy ( ↓) Global Entropy ( ↑) Expert Correlation ( ↓)Academic 617 70.50 (-7.06) 0.252 0.883 0.079 Professional 384 70.31 (-4.43) 0.149 0.733 0.038 Cooking 256 66.41 (-0.39) 0.156 0.568 -0.006 Fiction 240 71.25 (+0.84) 0.198 0.704 0.046 Overall 1497 69.62 (-0.90) 0.200 0.986 0.011 

Table 9: Category-level evaluation results on SHP. Scores in parentheses denote performance comparison against the single-head reward model. 

E Undesired Flips in Attribute Steering 

In addition to measuring successful attribute con-trol (Section 5.2), we also evaluate whether routing weight interventions introduce undesired changes to originally correct predictions. Specifically, we define the undesired flip rate as the proportion of initially correct predictions, under the setting where the target expert is removed, that are flipped after in-creasing the target expert weight. Lower undesired flip rates indicate more robust steering behavior. Figure 7 reports the undesired flip rates of sparse MoE and the baselines. As individual experts are not perfectly accurate for every attribute, all mod-els exhibit a modest undesired flip rate. Consid-ering the results together with Figure 2, vanilla MoE shows low flip rates in both the desired and undesired directions, suggesting that its experts are highly correlated and have limited influence on model behavior. In contrast, random expert steering in sparse MoE leads to high flip rates in both direc-tions. This indicates that sparse MoE learns more specialized experts, whose weights have a stronger effect on model preferences. Building on this spe-cialization, the improved interpretability of sparse MoE helps identify appropriate target experts for steering. As a result, sparse MoE achieves a high desired flip rate while maintaining a low undesired flip rate. These results suggest that sparse MoE enables more effective post-hoc attribute steering without introducing additional instability. 

F Details on Human Study 

We recruited five annotators with at least a master’s degree in computer science, computational linguis-tics, or linguistics to evaluate the interpretability of sparse MoE and the baseline models. Annotators are first asked to rate the pattern coherence after 16 Domain Expert 0 Expert 1 Expert 2 Expert 3 Expert 4 Academic 65.80 / 35.56 67.59 / 25.93 62.40 / 10.46 55.92 / 3.76 69.53 / 24.28 Professional 58.85 / 10.98 52.34 / 6.91 67.45 / 55.40 52.34 / 2.06 68.75 / 24.66 Cooking 61.33 / 7.18 61.72 / 21.17 49.61 / 1.19 68.36 / 68.28 59.77 / 2.18 Fiction 63.33 / 15.81 56.25 / 4.33 66.25 / 28.57 46.25 / 0.08 68.33 / 51.21 

Overall 62.86 / 21.23 60.86 / 16.78 62.12 / 23.31 55.58 / 13.77 67.47 / 24.92 

Table 10: Expert accuracy and average routing weights on SHP. Each cell reports expert accuracy / routing weight.                                                                

> ID Natural Language Description Description Fidelity ( ↑)Expert Specialization ( ↑)0asks for advice, feedback, or discussion on a personal, professional, or academic challenge 0.43 22.08 1asks for natural language inference or textual entailment classification 0.26 22.48 2requests the generation of computer code or technical scripts 0.45 21.53 3asks for troubleshooting advice regarding a specific problem in cooking, baking, or home maintenance 0.32 15.84 4asks for personal advice or recommendations 0.50 6.80 5contains a request for harmful, illegal, or policy-violating content 0.43 7.97 6asks to solve a procedural task involving numerical or list manipulation 0.51 25.98 7asks for an opinion, consensus, or general advice on a subjective or non-factual topic 0.41 6.20 8asks for a summary or extraction of information from a provided text 0.45 19.35 9asks for general information, advice, or explanation on a broad topic 0.62 8.59 10 asks for a direct answer to a multiple-choice or short-answer question 0.36 20.56 11 asks for technical advice, architectural design, or problem-solving in software engineering and IT -0.19 19.49 12 requests technical implementation details, system design, or professional strategy plans 0.39 18.69 13 requests assistance with illegal, harmful, or sexually explicit activities 0.62 3.35 14 asks for legal or procedural advice regarding a specific real-world situation 0.33 24.32 15 asks to solve a competitive mathematics problem 0.42 32.00 16 asks for a list of examples, suggestions, or items 0.30 8.60 17 asks a question containing a factual error, category mistake, or logical impossibility 0.30 3.92 18 requests assistance with illegal, harmful, or unethical activities 0.36 6.76 19 asks a question containing a factual error, logical fallacy, or absurd premise 0.35 8.12

Table 11: Natural language descriptions of all experts in the sparse MoE model. 

seeing the top-activating examples for each expert. They are then presented with the LLM-generated natural language description and asked to rate the description quality. The ratings show fair to moderate inter-annotator agreement. Sparse MoE achieves statistically sig-nificant improvements in pattern coherence over all baselines ( α < 0.05 ), while the improvements in description quality are not statistically significant. The statistical significance results are computed from paired t-test. The annotation instructions and rating scales for pattern coherence and description quality are pro-vided below. 

Pattern Coherence Pattern coherence measures whether the input prompts in the same group share a consistent and recognizable pattern. The shared pattern could be a specific task, shared topic, se-mantic feature, input format, writing style, user intent, domain, or another interpretable property. A high score means that the prompts appear meaning-fully related and could plausibly be summarized by a common feature. A low score means that the prompts appear random, unrelated, or too diverse to be summarized by a single coherent pattern. 1. Not Coherent: The prompts appear unrelated, random, or inconsistent. No clear shared task, topic, feature, format, style, intent, or domain can be identified. 2. Weakly Coherent: A few prompts share some similarities, but the overall group is noisy and difficult to summarize with a single pattern. 3. Moderately Coherent: The prompts share a partially recognizable pattern, but there are also several exceptions or mixed themes. 4. Mostly Coherent: Most prompts share a clear common task, topic, feature, format, style, intent, domain, or other interpretable property, with only minor exceptions. 5. Highly Coherent: The prompts are strongly and consistently related. They clearly reflect a common interpretable concept. 

Description Quality Description quality mea-sures how accurately the provided natural language 17 Attribute Single Reward HyRe Vanilla MoE MiCRo Sparse MoE Linguistic Creativity 31.73 37.50 (+6.73) 42.31 (+11.54) 40.39 (+9.62) 74.04 +(43.27)                                                                                             

> User Friendliness 39.33 46.44 (+9.36) 44.19 (+8.23) 42.32 (+6.36) 55.06 +(14.61)
> Humor and Entertainment Value 30.16 32.14 (+3.57) 36.51 (+6.75) 40.48 (+10.72) 80.56 +(50.80)
> Scientific Rigor 76.19 78.17 (+0.79) 81.74 (+3.17) 81.35 (+2.78) 82.54 +(7.54)
> Narrative and Storytelling Quality 34.17 40.00 (+7.50) 51.67 (+19.17) 51.25 (+18.75) 68.75 +(28.75)
> Creativity and Originality 18.52 31.02 (+14.35) 28.70 (+10.64) 28.24 (+10.18) 60.19 +(31.02)
> Factual Accuracy 85.92 81.22 (-0.47) 89.20 +(7.51) 88.73 (+7.04) 83.57 (+4.70) Innovativeness 27.27 38.38 (+9.59) 38.89 (+8.59) 39.39 (+9.09) 60.10 +(26.77)
> Pedagogical Effectiveness 58.06 58.06 (-1.62) 60.21 (+0.53) 60.21 (+0.53) 58.06 +(4.83)
> Economic Feasibility 45.90 49.18 (-1.64) 50.27 (+1.09) 50.82 (+1.64) 54.65 +(10.39)
> Technical Complexity 57.38 63.93 (+3.27) 61.75 (+1.09) 61.75 (+1.09) 68.30 +(10.92)
> Interdisciplinary Approach 50.00 56.32 (+2.87) 54.02 (+4.02) 54.60 (+4.60) 54.60 +(11.50)
> Empathy and Emotional Intelligence 54.55 56.36 (0.00) 60.61 (+4.25) 60.00 (+3.64) 63.64 +(16.37)
> Contextual Relevance 64.81 56.79 (-6.17) 62.96 (-1.85) 62.96 (-1.85) 59.88 (-3.08) Clarity and Conciseness 75.47 78.62 (+5.04) 77.36 (+3.78) 77.36 (+3.78) 89.31 +(25.16)
> User Experience 38.46 41.66 (+1.28) 41.67 (+1.29) 41.67 (+1.29) 43.59 +(7.05)
> Practical Application 44.45 50.33 +(5.23) 48.37 (+3.27) 49.02 (+3.92) 45.10 (+1.96) Overall 48.96 52.71 (+3.51) 54.73 (+5.47) 54.74 (+5.48) 64.82 +(17.21)

Table 12: Personalization results for all attributes on RPR. Scores in parentheses denote the change after adaptation. Higher scores are better. The sparse MoE model consistently demonstrates stronger personalization performance than baselines. 

description captures the common pattern shared by the input prompts. This pattern may involve a specific task, shared topic, semantic feature, input format, writing style, user intent, domain, or an-other interpretable property. A high score means that the description correctly summarizes the main shared pattern among the prompts without adding misleading or unsupported claims. A low score means that the description is inaccurate, too vague, inconsistent with the prompts, or misses the main pattern. 1. Poor: The description does not match the prompts, misses the main pattern, or describes a feature that is mostly absent. 2. Limited: The description captures only a small part of the pattern, or is mostly vague, incomplete, or partially incorrect. 3. Adequate: The description captures some im-portant shared features, but it is still vague, misses other key aspects or includes notice-able inaccuracies. 4. Good: The description accurately captures the main pattern of the prompts, with only mi-nor omissions or minor overgeneralizations. 5. Excellent: The description clearly and accu-rately summarizes the shared features of the prompts, with no meaningful inaccuracies. 

Human Study Ethics and Compensation Be-fore participating in the study, annotators were in-formed about how their data would be used and were told that their annotations would be deleted upon request. The study took approximately 20 minutes on average, and annotators were compen-sated at an hourly rate comparable to the local av-erage hourly salary for researchers. The human study protocol has been approved by the institu-tional ethics board. 

G Effect of Adaptation Set Size 

Figure 8 shows the attribute-level personalization performance of the sparse MoE model under differ-ent adaptation set sizes. Results are averaged over 17 attributes and three independently sampled adap-tation sets. We observe that, even with only 5 adap-tation examples, the model improves accuracy by approximately 13%. As expected, adaptation per-formance further improves with larger adaptation sets and begins to saturate at around 50 examples. 

H User-Level Personalization 

We use PersonalLLM for user-level adaptation. Fol-lowing prior work (Bose et al., 2025; Choi et al., 2025), we model each user as a weight vector over ten reward models. Adaptation and evaluation ex-amples are then constructed by the highest and lowest ranked responses according to user-specific weights. We sample 5 users from a Dirichlet dis-18 tribution with α = 0 .3, and use n = 50 examples for adaptation. Evaluation is conducted on 200 syn-thetic examples. Results are averaged over three independently sampled adaptation sets. Table 13 shows that our sparse MoE reward model also achieves the strongest performance in user-level adaptation. Consistent with the attribute-level adaptation results in Table 5, sparse MoE attains both the best post-adaptation performance and the largest improvements over the non-adapted model. By contrast, the two MoE baselines, vanilla MoE and MiCRo, fail to adapt effectively to new users, with performance degrading after adaptation. The static-weight ensemble model HyRe performs better than the MoE baselines, likely because its simpler adaptation mechanism is more robust in low-data settings. 

I Personalized Alignment with Adapted Preferences 

To evaluate whether the adapted preferences can support personalized alignment of LLMs, we post-train policies using adapted sparse MoE reward models corresponding to different attributes from RPR. Specifically, we select two attributes, cre-ativity and scientific rigor, which exhibit improved performance after personalization. For simplicity, we perform GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) post-training on prompts from the RPR train-ing set for 1000 optimization steps. We use an effective batch size of 8 and sample 4 rollouts per prompt. Policies are initialized from Llama3.2-3B-Instruct. During evaluation, we generate responses for 200 examples from the RPR test set and compare them against a baseline policy trained using the non-adapted reward model. An LLM judge (Qwen3.6-27B) evaluates which response better reflects the target attribute while maintaining higher overall response quality. Results in Table 14 show that post-training poli-cies with personalized reward models better align the policies with the target attributes compared to using a universal preference model. This demon-strates that the personalization improvements of our sparse MoE reward models also generalize to the post-training phase. 

J LLM Usage 

We used LLMs for coding assistance, text polish-ing, and figure generation. All scientific content, experimental decisions, analyses, and conclusions were developed and verified by the authors. 19 Method User1 User2 User3 User4 User5 Overall Single Reward 93.83 94.83 91.50 94.67 87.17 92.40 HyRe 95.50 (+0.83) 95.17 (-0.33) 93.00 (-0.17) 95.33 (-0.5) 89.50 (+1.0) 93.70 (+0.17) Vanilla MoE 94.83 (+0.00) 94.67 (-0.83) 90.67 (-2.00) 94.67 (-1.33) 88.83 (+0.50) 92.73 (-0.74) MiCRo 94.50 (-0.33) 94.67 (-0.83) 90.67 (-2.00) 94.83 (-1.17) 88.17 (-0.16) 92.57 (-0.90) Sparse MoE 95.83 (+4.50) 96.17 (+3.50) 92.67 (+1.34) 97.33 (+3.33) 88.50 (-0.33) 94.10 (+2.47) 

Table 13: Personalization results on PersonalLLM. Scores in parentheses denote the change after adaptation. Higher scores are better. Sparse MoE also demonstrates strong performance in user-level adaptation.                 

> Alignment Type Creativity Scientific Rigor Win Rate (Target Attribute, ↑)Win Rate (Quality, ↑)Win Rate (Target Attribute, ↑)Win Rate (Quality, ↑)Personalized 53.0 52.5 52.0 52.5
> Universal 45.5 45.5 44.5 45.0

Table 14: Personalized alignment results compared against alignment using a universal reward model. After personalization, the sparse MoE reward model can effectively guide policies toward the target attributes without negatively affecting overall generation quality. 

20 Prompt: Describing experts in natural language given top-activating examples 

Task Overview 

You are a machine learning researcher analyzing a sparse mixture-of-experts reward model. The model contains a router that assigns each input prompt to one or more experts. You are trying to understand what feature 

of the input prompt causes a specific expert to receive high routing weight. Each dataset example consists only of a user prompt. These prompts were selected because this expert was strongly activated 

for them, meaning the router assigned this expert a high weight. Your goal is to identify the common feature shared by these prompts, and to describe this feature as a concise, natural 

language concept. 

Instructions 

First, inspect each prompt and consider what concrete property it has. Then, synthesize the single feature that is most consistently shared across the prompts. 

The feature should describe the input prompt itself, not the model, the router, or the expert. For example, the common feature might be: 

• "asks for emotionally supportive advice" 

• "requests factual explanation of a technical concept" 

• "asks for creative writing or brainstorming" 

• "contains a safety-sensitive or potentially harmful request" 

• "asks for evaluation of competing options" If the prompts do not share a clear topic, focus on the type of user intent, task format, reasoning style, domain, constraint, 

or interaction pattern that best explains why the expert fires. 

Additional Rules 

Rules about the feature you identify: 

• The feature should be objective and concrete. 

• Err on the side of being concise. 

• The feature should be an attribute that could be present in an individual prompt. 

• Do not refer to "the expert", "the router", "activation", or "these examples" in the final answer. 

• Do not use vague descriptions such as "is helpful", "is complex", or "is high quality". 

• Avoid overly broad concepts such as "general question" unless no more specific feature is apparent. 

• If the shared feature is a negation, describe it directly, e.g., "does not specify a concrete task or goal". 

Prompts 

—————-{examples} 

—————-

Output 

Do not output anything besides the feature. Output exactly one description, starting with "-" and surrounded by quotes. 

Your response is:-" 

21 Prompt: Judging whether an example matches expert description 

You are a binary classifier. 

Task: 

Determine whether the input text expresses the feature described below. 

Feature description: 

{description} 

Input text: 

{input_text} 

Decision rule: 

Answer YES if the input text clearly matches or expresses 

the feature description. Answer NO otherwise. 

Output format: 

Return exactly one token: YES or NO. 

Answer: 

Figure 5: Prompt used to judge whether an input example matches a given natural language feature description. 10 20 30 40 50 

Number of Experts 

0.30 

0.35 

0.40 

0.45 

0.50  

> Description Fidelity (  )
> 0.35
> 0.38
> 0.46
> 0.40 0.40
> Description Fidelity
> Expert Specialization

8.0 

10.0 

12.0 

14.0 

16.0 

18.0 

> Expert Specialization (  )
> 16.61
> 15.13
> 13.72
> 10.84
> 8.75

Figure 6: Effect of the number of experts on inter-pretability. Description fidelity peaks at a certain num-ber of experts, while expert specialization consistently decreases as the number of experts increases. Random      

> Vanilla MoE
> MiCRo
> Sparse MoE
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> Undesired flip rate (  )
> 32.26
> 25.68 24.60 24.61
> 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> Target expert weight
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> Undesired flip rate (  )
> Random
> Vanilla MoE
> MiCRo
> Sparse MoE

Figure 7: Undesired flip rate during attribute steer-ing on the RPR dataset. Lower scores are better. In addition to its strong attribute steering capability, sparse MoE maintains a low undesired flip rate. 0 50 100 150 200 

Adaptation Set Size 

45 

50 

55 

60 

65 

> Accuracy (  )

Post-Adaptation 

Pre-Adaptation 

Figure 8: Personalization results of sparse MoE with different adaptation set sizes on RPR. Even with only 5 adaptation examples, sparse MoE achieves strong personalization performance. Performance further im-proves with larger adaptation sets before saturating at around 50 examples. 

22